---
title: 分析 02-11-2023
date: 2023-11-02 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Proof of Riesz representation theorem

**Theorem** (Rudin) Let $X$ be locally compact Hausdorff space. Consider $\Lambda\in [C_c(X;\mathbb R)]^\ast$ s.t. $\Lambda f\geq 0$ is $f\geq 0$. Then there exists a $\sigma$-algebra $\mathscr F\supseteq \mathscr B_X$ and unique complete Radon measure $\mu$ s.t. $\Lambda f=\int_X f\operatorname d\mu$ for all $f\in C_c(X;\mathbb R)$. 

**Proposition** If such $\mu$ exists, then it is unique. 

> **Proof** For uniqueness, suppose that the linear positive functional $\Lambda$ on $C_c(X)$ is represented by both $\mu_1$ and $\mu_2$ in $M_+(X)$. They are determined by values on compact sets. 
>
> Fix $K\subseteq X$ the compact and $\varepsilon>0$. By outer regularity of $\mu_2$, there exists $V\supseteq K$ s.t. $\mu_2(V)-\varepsilon <\mu_2(K)$. By Урысон's theorem, there exists continuous $1_K\leq f\leq 1_V$. Then 
> $$
> \mu_1(K)\leq \Lambda f\leq \mu_2(V)<\mu_2(K)+\varepsilon.
> $$
> Since $\varepsilon$ is arbitrary small, we have that $\mu_1(K)\leq \mu_2(K)$. Similarly, $\mu_2(K)\leq \mu_1(K)$ and thus $\mu_1(K)=\mu_2(K)$. 

**Proposition** Such $\mathscr F$ and $\mu$ exists. We construct $\mathscr F$ and $\mu$ in the following proof. We shall show that $\mu$ is a well-defined complete Radon measure. 

> **Proof** First, for $V$ open, we define 
> $$
> \mu(V):=\sup\{\Lambda f: f\leq 1_V\}.
> $$
> It is straight forward to verify that $\mu(V_1)\leq \mu(V_2)$ when $V_1\subseteq V_2$. For any $E\in X$, define 
> $$
> \mu=\inf\{\mu(O):O\supseteq B\text{ is open}\}.
> $$
> To see that $\mu$ is indeed a measure, we consider 
> $$
> \mathscr F^\times :=\{E\subseteq X:\mu(E)<\infty , \mu(E)=\sup_{K\subseteq E,\,K\text{ is compact}}\mu(K)\}.
> $$
> And define the larger space (local version)
> $$
> \mathscr F:=\{E\subseteq X:E\cap K\in \mathscr F^\times \quad (\forall K \text{ compact})\}
> $$
> And we claim that $(X,\mathscr F,\mu )$ is well-defined complete Radon measure space. 
>
> * For $N\subseteq $ s.t. $\mu(N)=0$, then for arbitrary compact set $K$, $N\cap K$ is also null and so are its compact subsets. Therefore, $N\in \mathscr F$. We also see that $\mu$ is complete and outer regular. 
>
> * To see that $\mu$ is an outer measure, we show by partition of unity that
>   $$
>   \mu(V_1\cup V_2)=\sup_{f\leq 1_{V_1\cup V_2}}\Lambda f\leq\sum_{i=1}^2\alpha_i\cdot  \sup_{f_i\leq 1_{V_i}}\Lambda f_i\leq \mu(V_1)+\mu(V_2).
>   $$
>   For disjoint $\{E_i\}_{i\in \geq 1}$, we show that $\mu(\bigcup_{i\geq 1} E_i)\leq \sum_{i\geq 1} \mu(E_i)$. The statement is clear if $\mu(E_i)$ for some $E_i$. For $\mu(E_i)<\infty$, we consider the list of open sets $\{V_i\}_{i\in \mathbb N}$ such that $E_i\subseteq V_i$ and $\mu(V_i)\leq \mu(E_i)+\varepsilon/2^i$. By partition of unity of finite sets, we have that
>   $$
>   \mu(\bigcup_{i\geq 1}V_i)\leq \sup_{N\in \mathbb N}\mu(\bigcup_{i=1}^NV_i)\leq  \sup_{n\in \mathbb N}\sum_{i=1}^N\mu(V_i)=\sum_{i=1}^N\mu(V_i).
>   $$
>   Therefore,
>   $$
>   \mu(\bigcup_{i\geq 1} E_i)\leq \mu(\bigcup_{i\geq 1} V_i)\leq \sum_{i\geq 1} \mu(V_i)\leq \varepsilon+\sum_{i\geq 1} \mu(E_i).
>   $$
>
> * To see that $\mu$ is finite on compact sets, we shall show that the collection of compact subsets of $X$ are contained in $K\in \mathscr F^\times$. For fixed $K$ and $f$ such that $f>1_K$, we defined the collection of open sets
>   $$
>   U_\alpha:=\{f>\alpha\}\quad (\alpha\in ]0,1[).
>   $$
>   Hence, $U_\alpha\supseteq K$, $g\leq 1_{U_\alpha}$ and $\alpha g\leq f$. It yields that 
>   $$
>   \mu(K)\leq \mu(U_\alpha)=\sup\{\Lambda g:g\leq U_\alpha\}\leq \alpha^{-1}\cdot \Lambda f.
>   $$
>   Therefore, $\mu(K)\leq \lim_{\alpha\to 1^-}\alpha^{-1}\cdot \Lambda f=\Lambda f$. Since $f$ is arbitrary, we obtain
>   $$
>   \mu(K)\leq \inf\{\Lambda f:f\geq 1_K\}<\infty.
>   $$
>   By outer regularity, there exists an open set $V\supseteq K$ s.t. $\mu(V)\leq \mu(K)+\varepsilon$. Hence, 
>   $$
>   \mu(K)+\varepsilon \geq \mu(V)\geq \Lambda h\geq \mu(K),
>   $$
>   where $1_K\leq h\leq 1_V$ (by Урысон's lemma). Consider $\varepsilon \to 0^+$, $\mu(K)=\inf \{\Lambda f:f\geq 1_K\}$. 
>
> * Finally, we show that $V$ with finite measure is inner regular, i.e., belongs to $\mathscr F^\times$. There is nothing to prove when $V$ is null. For $\mu(V)>\beta >0$, there exists $f\leq 1_V$ s.t. $\Lambda f> \beta$. Since $f<1_O$ for some open set $O$ containing $\operatorname {supp}(f)$. By outer regularity, we have that 
>   $$
>   \Lambda f\leq \inf_{O\text{ open}, \,O\supseteq \operatorname{supp}(f)} \mu(O)=\mu(\operatorname{supp}(f)).
>   $$
>   That is, we obtain a compact set $K\subseteq V$ s.t. $\mu(K)>\beta$, proving the inner regularity on $V$. 
>   
> * $\mu$ is $\sigma$-sub-additive on $\mathscr F^\times$. First we shall prove $\mu(K_1\cup K_2)=\mu(K_1)+\mu(K_2)$ when $K_1$ and$K_2$ are disjoint. By Урысон's lemma, there exists $1_{K_i}\leq f_i\leq 1_{V_i}$ for $K_i\subseteq V_i\subseteq (X\setminus K_{3-i})$. Since $\mu(V_i\setminus K_i)$ can be arbitrary small, we assume that
>   $$
>   \mu (K_1)+\mu(K_2)\leq \Lambda(f_1+f_2)\leq \mu (K_1\cup K_2)+\varepsilon.
>   $$
>   Then we send $\varepsilon \searrow 0$ and deduce that $\mu(K_1\cup K_2)=\mu(K_1)+\mu(K_2)$ for disjoint $K_1$ and $K_2$. Since $\mu$ is an outer measure, we have a priori concluded the $\sigma$-additivity of $\mu$. 
>

**Proposition** In the construction of $\mathscr F$ and $\mu$ in the following proof. We shall show that $\mathscr F$ is a well-defined $\sigma$-algebra. 

> **Proof** We claim that $\mathscr F$ contains all closed subsets of $X$. Let $C$ be arbitrary fixed closed set, then for arbitrary compact set $K$, $C\cap K$ is a compact subset and thus belongs to $\mathscr F^\times$. It directly follows that $\mathscr F$ is a Borel $\sigma$-algebra. 
>
> * First, $\mathscr F^\times $ is closed under complete and finite unions and intersections, by $\sigma$-additivity on $\mathscr F^\times$. And so is $\mathscr F$. 
>
> * If $A:=\bigcup_{i\geq 1} A_i$ for $A_i\in \mathscr F$, then $A\cap K=\bigcup_{i\geq 1}(A_i\cap K)$ for arbitrary compact $K$. Note $A\cap K=\bigcup_{i\geq 1}B_i$ is a disjoint union with $B_1=A_1\cap K$ and 
>   $$
>   B_{k+1}:=(A_{k+1}\cap K)\setminus \bigcup_{1\leq i\leq k}(A_i\cap K).
>   $$
>   Due to $\sigma$-sub-additivity of $\mu$, $A\cap K\in \mathscr F^\times$ and thus $A\in \mathscr F$. 
>
> * The rests are clear. 

**Proposition** In fact, $\mathscr F^\times :=\{E\in \mathscr F:\mu(E)<\infty\}$. 

**Proposition** $\mu$ represents $\Lambda$ on $C_c(\mathbb R)$, i.e., $\Lambda f=\int_X f\operatorname d\mu$. 

> **Proof** Given $f\in C_c(\mathbb R)$, we take $K=\overline{\operatorname{supp}(f)}$ and $f(K)\subseteq [\alpha,\beta]$. Then consider the partition
> $$
> \alpha=y_0<y_1<\cdots <y_{N-1}\leq \beta <\beta_N,\quad (y_j-y_{j-1}<\delta). 
> $$
> Consider $E_j=K\cap \{y_{j-1}\leq f< y_j\}$. Then there exists an open set $O_j\supseteq E_j$ s.t. $\mu(O_j)<\mu(E_j)+\frac{\delta}{N}$ and $f<y_j<\delta $ on $O_j$. Now take $\{(O_j,\psi_j)\}$ the partition of unity on $K$, then 
> $$
> \mu(K)\leq\sum_{\leq N}\Lambda \psi_j\leq \delta+\sum_{\leq N}\mu(E_i).
> $$
> Now consider
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> \Lambda f&=\sum_{\leq N} \Lambda(\psi_i f)\\[6pt]
> &\leq \sum_{\leq N}(y_j+\delta )\Lambda(\psi_i)\\[6pt]
> &\leq \sum_{\leq N}(|\alpha|+y_j+\delta )\Lambda(\psi_i)-\sum_{\leq N}|\alpha|\Lambda \psi_j\\[6pt]
> &\leq \sum_{\leq N}(|\alpha|+y_j+\delta )\mu(O_j)-\sum_{\leq N}|\alpha|\mu(K)\\[6pt]
> &\leq \sum_{\leq N}(|\alpha|+y_j+\delta )(\mu(E_j)+\delta/N)-\sum_{\leq N}|\alpha|\mu(K)
> \end{align*}
> $$
>  Here 
> $$
> \sum_{\leq N}y_j\mu (E_j)\leq \sum_{\leq N}\int_{E_j}(f+\delta)\operatorname d\mu\leq \delta\mu(K)+\int_Xf\operatorname d\mu,
> $$
> and $\sum_{\leq N}|\alpha|\mu(E_j)-\sum_{\leq N}|\alpha|\mu(K)\leq \delta$. It yields that $\Lambda f-\int_Xf\operatorname d\mu$ is bounded by multiples of $\delta$. In final, we send $\delta\searrow 0$ and obtain 
> $$
> \Lambda f\leq \int_X f\operatorname d\mu.
> $$
> Similarly, we have that $\Lambda (-f)\leq \int_X(-f)\operatorname d\mu$. Hence, $\Lambda f=\int_X f\operatorname d\mu$. 

