---
title: 分析-HW1
date: 2023-09-19 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## HW1 for Analysis

> ANALYSIS $\bullet$ MATH6105 $\bullet$ HOMEWORK \#1
> THE PROBLEM SHEETS ARE NOT TO BE HANDED IN

**Ex 1** Let $\{\omega_n\}$ be a sequence of non-negative real numbers. For a subset $E\subset \mathbb N$, set
$$
\mu_\omega(E):=\sum_{n\in E}\omega_n.
$$
Show that $\mu_\omega$ is a measure on $(\mathbb N,\mathcal P(\mathbb N))$. (Recall that $\mathcal P(\mathbb N):=\{E:E\subset \mathbb N\}$.) Now, let $\nu$ be an
arbitrary measure on $(\mathbb N,\mathcal P(\mathbb N))$. Show that $\nu$ coincides with the measure $\mu_\omega$ where $\omega_n=\nu(\{n\})$. 

> **Proof** It is clear that $(\mathbb N,\mathcal P(\mathbb N))$ is a well-defined $\sigma$-algebra. Since
>
> * $\mu_\omega:\mathcal P(\mathbb N)\to [0,+\infty]$,
> * $\mu_\omega(\varnothing)=0$, 
> * $\mu_\omega(\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1} E_n)=\sum_{j_n\in E_n}\sum_{n\geq 1}\omega_{j_n}=\sum_{n\geq 1}\sum_{j_n\in E_n}\omega_{j_n}=\sum_{n\geq 1}\mu_\omega(E_n)$,
>
> we see that $\mu$ is a measure on $(\mathbb N,\mathcal P(\mathbb N))$. Conversely, given measure $\nu$ and arbitrary $E\subset \mathbb N$, we have that 
> $$
> \nu(E)=\nu\left(\bigsqcup_{n\in E}\{n\}\right)=\sum_{n\in E}\nu(\{n\})=\mu_\omega(E)
> $$
> where $\omega_n=\nu(\{n\})$. 

**Ex 2**  **(Characterisation of the Euclidean topology on $\mathbb R$)**. Let $E$ be an open subset of $\mathbb R$. For $x,y\in E$, denote by $I_{x,y}$ the closed interval between $x$ and $y$ ($I_{x,x}\equiv x$). Define a relation $\sim $ on $E$ such that $x\sim y$ if and only if $I_{x,y}\subset E$. 

1. Show that $\sim $ is an equivalence relation on $E$. What are the equivalence classes?
2. Show that $E$ is the disjoint union of at most countably many open intervals.

> **Proof** 
>
> 1. (a) For arbitrary $x\in E$, we have that $I_{x,x}=\{x\}\subset E$, which shows the regularity. 
>
>    (b) $I_{x,y}=I_{y,x}$ proves the symmetricity. 
>
>    (c) If $I_{x,y}\subset E$, then there exists a continuous map $\gamma:[0,1]\to I_{x,y}$ with $\gamma(0)=x$, $\gamma(1)=y$. The combination of paths implies the transitivity. 
>
>    By (a), (b) and (c), $\sim$ is a well-defined equivalence relation. By (c), the equivalence classes are connected components of $E$.
> 2. We learn from the previous answer that $E$ is a disjoint union of connected components, which are open subsets of $E$. Since $E$ is open in $\mathbb R$, the open subsets of $E$ are also open subsets of $\mathbb R$, which contains at most a point with all rational coordinates. It yields the proposition. 

**Ex 3** Using the above question, deduce that if $\mathscr F$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $\mathbb R$ containing all the intervals of the form $]a,\infty[$ for $a\in \mathbb R$, then $\mathscr F$ contains the Borel $\sigma$-algebra on $\mathbb R$. 

> **Proof** All intervals of the form $]a,\infty[$ generate $]a,b]$ for arbitrary $b>a$. For $\varepsilon<b-a$, we have that
> $$
> ]a,b-\varepsilon]\cup\bigcup_{n\geq 1}\,]b-\varepsilon/n,b-\varepsilon/(n+1)]=\,]a,b[\,.
> $$
> Hence, all intervals of the form $]a,b[$ is also generated by $]a,\infty[\,$'s. By **Ex 2**, any open set of $\mathbb R$ is a disjoint union of open intervals. Therefore, $\mathscr B_{\mathbb R}\subset \sigma(\{]a,\infty]\}_{a\in \mathbb R})$. In fact, $\mathscr B_{\mathbb R}=\sigma(\{]a,\infty]\}_{a\in \mathbb R})$. 

**Ex 4** **(Pushforward measure)** Let $(X,\mathscr F,\mu)$ be a measure space, and let $f:X\to Y$ be a function between sets. Define
$$
f_\sharp(\mathscr F):=\{B\subset Y:f^{-1}(B)\in \mathscr F\},\quad [f_\sharp\mu](B):=\mu(f^{-1}(B))\quad \text{for }B\in f_\sharp(\mathscr F).
$$
1. Show that $(Y,f_\sharp(\mathscr F),f_\sharp\mu)$ is a measure space. 
2. Now let $Y=\mathbb R$ and $(X,\mathscr F, \mu)$ be $(\mathbb R,\mathscr B(\mathbb R),\mathscr L^1)$, the Borel $\sigma$-alegbra and the Lebesgue measure. Determine $(\mathbb R,f_\sharp(\mathscr F),f_\sharp\mu)$ when
  * $f(x)=\tan x$ if $\cos x\neq 0$, and $f(x)=0$ if $\cos x=0$;
  * $f(x)=\arctan x$.

> **Proof** 
>
> 1. First we show that $(Y,f_\sharp(\mathscr F))$ is a $\sigma$-algebra. 
>
>    (a) $f^{-1}(Y)=X\in \mathscr F$, thus $Y\in f_\sharp(\mathscr F)$. 
>
>    (b) For arbitrary $F\subset Y$, we have that $f^{-1}(Y\setminus F)=X\setminus f^{-1}(F)$. Hence, $F\in f_\sharp(\mathscr F)$ whenever $(Y\setminus F)\in f_\sharp(\mathscr F)$. 
>
>    (c) For collection of disjoint $\{Y_n\}_{n\geq 1}\subset f_\sharp(\mathscr F)$, we have that $f^{-1}(\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1} Y_n)=\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1}f^{-1}(Y_n)\in \mathscr F$. Thus $\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1} Y_n\in f_\sharp(\mathscr F)$. 
>
>    By (a), (b) and (c), $(Y,f_\sharp(\mathscr F))$ is a $\sigma$-algebra. 
>
>    Then we show that $(Y,f_\sharp(\mathscr F),f_\sharp\mu)$ is a measure space. 
>
>    (a) $[f_\sharp\mu]:f_\sharp(\mathscr F)\to [0,+\infty]$. 
>
>    (b) $[f_\sharp\mu] (\varnothing)=\mu(f^{-1}(\varnothing))=0$. 
>
>    (c) For disjoint union $\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1}Y_n$, we have that
>    $$
>    [f_\sharp\mu](\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1}Y_n)=\mu(f^{-1}(\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1}Y_n))=\mu(\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1}f^{-1}(Y_n))=\sum_{n\geq 1}\mu(f^{-1}(Y_n))=\sum_{n\geq 1}[f_\sharp\mu](Y_n).
>    $$
>     By (a), (b) and (c), $(Y,f_\sharp(\mathscr F),f_\sharp\mu)$ is a measure space. 
>
> 2. For the former case, the $\sigma$-algebra $f_\sharp(\mathscr B(\mathbb R))$ is still $\mathscr B(\mathbb R)$. $[f_\sharp\mu] (F)=0$ whenever $\mu(F)=0$, otherwise $[f_\sharp\mu] (F)=\infty$. For the latter case, the $\sigma$-algebra $f_\sharp(\mathscr B(\mathbb R))$ is 
>    $$
>    \sigma(\mathscr B(\,]-\pi/2,\pi/2[\,)\cup\mathcal P(\,]-\infty,-\pi/2]\cup[\pi/2,+\infty[)).
>    $$
>    The pushforward measure is $[f_\sharp\mu] (F)=[f_\sharp\mu] (F\cap [-\pi/2,\pi/2])=\mu(\tan(F\cap [-\pi/2,\pi/2]))$. 

**Ex 5** **(The First Borel Cantelli Lemma)** Let $\{E_j\}_{j=1}^\infty$ be a countable family of measurable subsets of $(X,\mathscr F, \mu)$. Suppose that $\sum_{j=1}^\infty \mu(E_j)<\infty$, and define
$$
\limsup_{j\to\infty} E_j:=\{x\in X:x\in E_k\text{ for infinitely many }k.\}.
$$
Show that $\limsup_{j\to\infty}E_j$ is measurable $\mu$-null. 

> **Proof** Set $\overline E=\limsup_{j\to\infty} E_j$. If $\mu(\overline E)>0$, then 
> $$
> \sum_{j=1}^\infty\mu(E_j)\geq \sum_{k=1}^\infty\mu(E_{j_k})\geq \sum_{k=1}^\infty\mu(\overline E)=\infty\quad (\overline E\subset E_{j_k}).
> $$
> It contradicts $\sum_{j=1}^\infty \mu(E_j)<\infty$. 

**Ex 6** Give the details of the proof for Carathéodory's theorem: 

> **Theorem** . Let $\mu^\ast$ be an outer measure on a nonempty set $X$. Set 
> $$
> \mathscr M^\ast:=\{A\subset X:\mu^\ast(E)\geq \mu^\ast (E\cap A)+\mu^\ast (E\setminus A)\text{ for all }E\subset X\}.
> $$
> Then $\mathscr M^\ast$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $X$, and $\mu^\ast$ restricted to $\mathscr M$ is a complete measure. 

> **Proof** (a) $\varnothing\in \mathscr M^\ast$ is clear. (b) $A\in \mathscr M\Leftrightarrow A^c\in \mathscr M$ is clear. (c) For disjoint union $\bigsqcup_{n\geq 1}A_n$ with $A_n$'s in $\mathscr M$, we have that 
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> \mu^\ast(E)&=\mu^\ast (E\cap A_1)+\mu^\ast (E\cap A_1^c)\\[6pt]
> &=\mu^\ast (E\cap A_1)+\mu^\ast (E\cap A_1^c\cap A_2)+\mu^\ast (E\cap A_1^c\cap A_2^c)\\[6pt]
> &=\mu^\ast (E\cap A_1)+\mu^\ast (E\cap A_2)+\mu^\ast (E\cap A_1^c\cap A_2^c)\\[6pt]
> &=\cdots\\[6pt]
> &=\sum_{1\leq k\leq n}\mu^\ast (E\cap A_k)+\mu^\ast (E\cap \bigcap_{1\leq k\leq n} A_k^c).
> \end{align*}
> $$
> Consider $n\to\infty$, we have that 
> $$
> \mu^\ast (E)\geq\sum_{k\geq 1}\mu^\ast (E\cap A_k)+\mu^\ast (E\cap \bigcap_{k\geq 1} A_k^c).
> $$