---
title: 分析 26-Sept-2023
date: 2023-09-26 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

**Notation** Recall that, for $f:(X,\mathscr F,\mu)\to [0,\infty]$ measurable, define 
$$
\int_X f\mathrm d\mu:=\sup\left\{\int_X\varphi \mathrm d\mu : 0\leq \varphi \leq f,\varphi\text{ is simple}.\right\}. 
$$
For arbitrary $B\in\mathscr F$, we have that 
$$
\int_B f\mathrm d\mu=\int_X f\cdot 1_E\mathrm d\mu. 
$$
**Theorem** (MCT) Let $\{f_n\}\subset \mathscr L^{0}_+(X,\mathscr F,\mu)$ be s.t. $f_n\leq f_{n+1}$, then
$$
\lim_{n\to\infty}\int_X f_n\mathrm d\mu=\int_X \lim_{n\to\infty}f_n\mathrm d\mu.
$$

> In general, $\displaystyle \lim_{n\to\infty}\int_X f_n\mathrm d\mu=\int_X \lim_{n\to\infty}f_n\mathrm d\mu+\nu$, where $\nu\geq 0$ encodes the information of concentration and oscillation. For instance, $f_n:=n1_{[0,n]}$ has limit $0$, whereas $\int f_n\mathrm dx=1$. The limit
> $$
> \delta(x)=\lim_{n\to\infty} f_n(x)
> $$
> is call Dirac-delta function, which is a measure on $C^0(\mathbb R,\mathbb R)$, s.t.
> $$
> \int_{\mathbb R}f(x)\mathrm d\delta =f(0)\quad \forall f:\mathbb R\to \mathbb R. 
> $$
> 

> **Proof** Set $\lim_{n\to \infty}f_n(x)=f(x)$. Then $\leq$ is clear. Conversely, pick and $0<\alpha<1$, and any
> $$
> \varphi\in \mathscr L^{0,\text{ simple}}_+\quad (0\leq \varphi \leq f). 
> $$
> Consider $E_n:=\{x:f_n(x)\geq \alpha\varphi(x)\}$. Then $E_1\subseteq E_2\subseteq \cdots  E_n\subseteq \cdots$ are measurable with union $X$. Note that $\varphi:A\mapsto \int_A\varphi \mathrm d\mu$ is a measure on $\mathscr F$. Therefore, 
> $$
> \int_{E_n}\varphi\mathrm d\mu\nearrow \int_X\varphi \mathrm d \mu.
> $$
> Since 
> $$
> \int_{E_n}\varphi \mathrm d\mu=\int_{\{\varphi \leq f_n/\alpha\}}\varphi \mathrm d\mu\leq \alpha^{-1}\int_X f_n\mathrm d\mu,
> $$
> we take $n\to \infty$ to obtain
> $$
> \int_X\varphi \mathrm d\mu\leq \alpha^{-1}\cdot \lim_{n\to\infty}\int_Xf_n\mathrm d\mu.
> $$
> Taking supremum w.r.t. $\varphi$ and let $\alpha\to 1^-$, we finally deduce the theorem. 

**Proposition** For $\{f_n\}\subseteq \mathscr L^0_+$, we have that 
$$
\int_X\sum_{n\geq 1}f_n\mathrm d\mu=\sum_{n\geq 1}\int _X f_n\mathrm d\mu.
$$
**Proposition** $f\in \mathscr L_+^0$, then $\int_X f\mathrm d\mu =0$ whenever $f=0$ w.r.t. $\mu$ a.e..

> Lebesgue integrals omit the null sets. 

> **Proof** Consider $(\neg \text{ L.H.S.})\Rightarrow  (\neg \text{ R.H.S.})$. Consider $\int_Xf \mathrm d\mu=I>0$. There exists a simple function $0\leq \varphi\leq f$ such that $\int _X\varphi \mathrm d\mu\geq I/2>0$. Denote the finite sum $\varphi =\sum \alpha_i 1_{E_i}$ for $\alpha_i\geq 0$ and $E_i$'s disjoint . Then $\sum \alpha_i\mu(E_i)>0$. There exists some $E_i$ with $\alpha_i\mu(E_i)>0$ such that 
> $$
> \int_{E_i} f\mathrm d\mu\geq \int_{E_i}\varphi  \mathrm d\mu=\alpha_i\mu(E_i)>0.
> $$
> Consider $(\neg \text{ R.H.S.})\Rightarrow  (\neg \text{ L.H.S.})$. If there exists a $\mu(E)>0$ such that $f>0$ on $E$, then 
> $$
> f^{-1}\left(\bigcup_{n\geq 0}\,](n+1)^{-1},n^{-1}]\right)=\bigcup_{n\geq 0}f^{-1}\left(\,](n+1)^{-1},n^{-1}]\right)=E\quad (0^{-1}:=\infty).
> $$
> It yields that $E_n:=f^{-1}( \,](n+1)^{-1},n^{-1}])$ is positive measure for some $n\geq 0$. Therefore, 
> $$
> \int_X f\mathrm d\mu\geq\int_X{(n+1)^{-1}}\cdot 1_{E_n}\mathrm d\mu=\dfrac{\mu(E_n)}{n+1}>0.
> $$

**Theorem** (Fatou's lemma) For $\{f_n\}\subseteq \mathscr L_+^0(X,\mathscr F,\mu)$, we have that 
$$
\int_X\liminf_{n\to\infty} f_n\mathrm d\mu\leq\liminf_{n\to\infty} \int_X f_n\mathrm d\mu.
$$

> **Proof** Set $g_n:=\inf_{k\geq n}f_k$. By MCT, we have that 
> $$
> \int_X\liminf_{n\to\infty} f_n\mathrm d\mu=\int_X\lim_{n\to\infty}g_n\mathrm d\mu=\lim_{n\to\infty}\int_X g_n\mathrm d\mu\leq \liminf_{n\to\infty} \int_X f_n\mathrm d\mu.
> $$

**Definition** (integrable fucntion)
$$
\mathscr L^1(X,\mathscr F,\mu):=\left\{f\in \mathscr L^0(X,\mathscr F,\mu):\int_X|f|\mathrm d\mu<\infty\right\}.
$$
**Proposition** For $f\in \mathscr L^1$, $\mathbb F=\mathbb R$ or $\mathbb C$, $f^{-1}(\mathbb F\setminus 0)$ is $\sigma$-finite. Consider the preimage of $]n-1,n]$ for $n\in \mathbb Z$. 

**Proposition** For $f,g\in \mathscr L^1$, $f=g$ $\mu$-a.e. whenever $\int_X|f-g|\mathrm d\mu=0$, whenever $\int_E (f-g)\mathrm d\mu=0$ for arbitrary $E\in \mathscr F$. Notice that $f\sim g$ is a equivalence relation. We can alternatively define that
$$
\mathscr L^1(X,\mathscr F,\mu):=\left.\left\{f\in \mathscr L^0(X,\mathscr F,\mu):\int_X|f|\mathrm d\mu<\infty\right\}\right/\sim.
$$
**Convention** Always say $f\in \mathscr L^1$ instead of $[f]\in \mathscr L^1$. 

**Theorme** (DCT) Assume $\{f_n\}\subseteq \mathscr L^1(X,\mathscr F,\mu;\mathbb C)$, and $f_n\to f$ $\mu$-a.e.. Suppose that $|f_n|\leq g$ ($\mu$-a.e.) for some $g\in \mathscr L^1(X,\mathscr F,\mu;\mathbb R)$, then 
$$
\lim_{n\to\infty}\int_X f_n\mathrm d\mu=\int_X \lim_{n\to\infty}f_n\mathrm d\mu.
$$

> **Proof** Consider $f_n=\mathrm{Re}(f_n)+ \sqrt{-1}\mathrm{Im}(f_n)$. WLOG we assume $f_n$ are real-valued. Then 
> $$
> \int_X (g\pm f)\mathrm d\mu=\int_X\liminf_{n\to\infty} (g\pm f_n)\mathrm d\mu\leq\liminf_{n\to\infty} \int_X (g\pm f_n)\mathrm d\mu.
> $$
> Therefore, 
> $$
> -\liminf_{n\to\infty}\int_X (-f)\mathrm d\mu=\limsup_{n\to\infty}\int_X f\mathrm d\mu\leq \int_X f\mathrm d\mu\leq \liminf_{n\to\infty}\int_Xf\mathrm d\mu,
> $$
> yielding DCT.

**Proposition** Simple functions are dense in $\mathscr L^1$ w.r.t. $\|\|_{\mathscr L^1}$-norm. 

> **Proof** For arbitrary sequence of simple functions  $0\leq \varphi_n\nearrow |f|$, we have $|\varphi_n-f|\leq 2|f|\in \mathscr L^1$. By DTC, 
> $$
> \lim_{n\to\infty}\int_X|\varphi_n -f|\mathrm d\mu=0.
> $$
> Consider $f=f_+-(-f_-)$, $\varphi$ is dense in $\mathscr L^1$ w.r.t. $\|\|_{\mathscr L^1}$-norm.

**Proposition** $\mathscr L^1(\mathbb R,\mathscr B_{\mathbb R},\mu_{\text{Lebesgue-Stieltjes}})$ has dense subset consists of step functions on open sets w.r.t. $\mathscr L^1$-norm. 
