---
title: 分析 19-Sept-2023
date: 2023-09-19 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## L-S measure

**Definition** For increasing, right continuous ($F(x)=\lim_{x'\to x^+}F(x')$) function $F:\mathbb R\to \mathbb R$, consider the interval of the type $]a,b]$, $]a,\infty[$ and $\varnothing$. Set $\mathscr A$ the algebra of disjoint union of intervals of the of the type above. Define

* $\mu_0:\mathscr A\to [0,\infty]$, $\mu_0(\varnothing)=0$, $\mu_0(\bigsqcup_{\text{finite}}]a_i,b_i])=\sum_{\text{finite}} F(b_i)-F(a_i)$. 

> If $F=\mathrm{id}_{\mathbb R}$, then $\mu_0=\mathscr L^1$ extends to the standard Lebesgue measure. 

> $\mu_0$ is the premeasure on $\mathscr A$. 

> $\sigma(\mathscr A)=\mathscr B_{\mathbb R}$ is the Borel algebra. 

The completion $\mu_F=\overline{\mu_0}$ is the Lebesgue Stieljes measure (L-S measure for short). 

**Definition** ((L-S) measurable and Borel measurable)

* If $F^{-1}:\{\text{open sets}\}\to \{\text{measurable sets}\}$, then we call $F$ (L-S) measurable. 
* If $F^{-1}:\{\text{open sets}\}\to \{\text{Borel sets}\}$, then we call $F$ Borel measurable. 

> Increasing, right continuous functions on $\mathbb R$ are measurable. 

**Proposition** $\mu_F=\mu_G$ whenever $F-G$ is a constant. 

> **Proof** In fact, we can recover $F$ from $\mu_F$ by taking integral, for instance, we fixed $F(0)=0$, yielding that
>
> * $F(x)=\mu_F(]0,x])$ for $x\geq 0$;
> * $F(x)=-\mu_F(]x,0])$ for $x\leq 0$. 

**Proposition** By Hahn-extension (and $\mathbb R$ is $\sigma$-finite), $(\mathscr A,\mu_0)$ extends to a unique Borel measure of $(\mathscr B_{\mathbb R},\mathscr L^1)$. 

**Definition** $\mathscr M_\mu:=\{E\subseteq X\mid E\text{ satisfy condition [C]}\}$. 

> It is clear that for arbitrary $E\in \mathscr M_\mu$, $\mu_F(E)=\inf\left\{\sum_{j\in \mathbb N} \mu_F(]a_j,b_j])\mid E\subseteq \bigcup_{j\in \mathbb N}]a_j,b_j]\right\}$. 

**Proposition** In fact, $\mu_F(E)$ is approximated by open sets, i.e., for arbitrary $E\in \mathscr M_\mu$, 
$$
\mu_F(E)=\inf\left\{\sum_{j\in \mathbb N} \mu_F(]a_j,b_j[)\mid E\subseteq \bigcup_{j\in \mathbb N}]a_j,b_j[\right\}
$$

> **Proof** We write $\mu_{],[}(E):\inf\left\{\sum_{j\in \mathbb N} \mu_F(]a_j,b_j[)\mid E\subseteq \bigcup_{j\in \mathbb N}]a_j,b_j[\right\}$, and so is $\mu_{],]}$. 
>
> 1. Since $]a,b[\,\,=\bigcup_{k\in \mathbb N}\,\,]\frac{a+kb}{k+1},\frac{a+(k+1)b}{k+2}]$, we have that $\mu_{],]}(E)\leq \mu_{],[}(E)$. 
>
> 2. In order to prove the other direction, WLOG we assume that $\mu_F(E)<\infty$ by $\sigma$-finiteness. $\forall \varepsilon>0$, there exists  countable many disjoint intervals $\{]a_j,b_j]\}_{j\in \mathbb N}$ such that 
>    $$
>    \left|\mu_{],]}(E)-\sum_{j=1}^\infty (F(b_j)-F(a_j))\right|<\varepsilon/2.
>    $$
>    By right continuity of $F$, there exits $\{\delta_j\}_{j\in \mathbb N}$ such that $F(b_j+\delta_j)-F(b_j)<\varepsilon/2^{j+2}$. As a result, 
>    $$
>    |\mu_{],[}(E)- \mu_{],]}(E)|\leq \varepsilon/2+\sum_{j\geq 2}\varepsilon/2^j=\varepsilon.
>    $$
>     Since $\varepsilon$ is arbitrarily small, $\mu_{],]}\equiv \mu_{],[}$ on $\mathscr M_\mu$. 

**Theorem** (Inner and outer regularity of $\mathscr M_\mu$) Similar to the proposition above, we deduce that
$$
\begin{align*}
\mu_F(E)&\overset{\text{o}}=\inf\left\{\mu_F(\mathcal O)\mid E\subseteq \mathcal O\text{ the open set in }X\right\},\\[6pt]
&\overset{\text{i}}=\sup\left\{\mu_F(\mathcal K)\mid \mathcal K\subseteq E\text{ the compact set in }X\right\}.
\end{align*}
$$
Here o (resp., i) stands for outer (resp., inner) regularity. 

**Theorem** (Littlewood $1^\mathrm{st}$ principle) Borel set $E\in \mathscr M_\mu$ is almost a good set.

* Here a good set is either of the form
  1. ($F_\sigma$-set) the countable union of closed sets,
  2. ($G_\delta$-set) the countable intersection of open sets;
* $E$ and $E'$ are almost equivalent whenever $E\setminus E'$ and $E'\setminus E$ are both null. 

> This is concluded from the theorem of regularity. Furthermore, $E\subseteq \mathbb R^n$, TFAE, 
>
> 1. $R\subseteq \mathscr M_\mu$​;
> 2. $E$ contains a $F_\sigma$ set $H$, and $E\setminus V$ is null; 
> 3. $E$ is contained in a $G_\delta$ set $V$, and $V\setminus E$ is null.

**Example** For convention, note the (one dimensional) Lebesgue measure $\mathscr L^1=\mu_F$, $\mathscr M_{\mathscr L^1}=\mathscr M_\mu$. The completion $(\sigma(\mathscr A),\mu)\overset{\text{completion}}\longrightarrow (\mathscr F^\ast,\overline \mu)$​ is now written as 
$$
(\mathscr B_{\mathbb R},\mathscr L^1)\longrightarrow (\mathscr M_{\mathscr L^1},\mathscr L^1). 
$$
**Example** Some Pathological examples. 

1. There exists open dense set on $[0,1]$ with arbitrary small measure. 

   > Topologically large set $\,\,\,\,\not\!\!\!\!\implies$ set with large measure. 

2. There exists uncountable null set.

   > The Cantor set $C$ measures $\lim_{n\to\infty}(2/3)^{-n}$​ by classical construction; notice the surjection
   > $$
   > \varphi:C\twoheadrightarrow [0,1],\quad \sum_{k\geq 1}\dfrac{2a_k}{3^k}\mapsto  \sum_{k\geq 1}\dfrac{a_k}{2^k}\quad ((a_k)_{\geq 1}\in \{0,1\}^{\geq 1}).
   > $$

**Proposition** The cardinality of Borel measurable sets is $|\mathbb R|$. 

> **Proof** Let $\mathcal B$ be a topological basis of $\mathbb R$ such that $x_\bullet:\mathbb N\overset\sim \to \mathcal B$ is a set bijection. One can compute either $\bigcup_{i\in I}x_i$ for arbitrary $I\subseteq \mathbb N$, or $\mathbb R\setminus x_i$ for some $i\in \mathbb N$, and create a new sequence staring with the result and followed by $(x_i)_{i\in \mathbb N}$. The possible choices has cardinality no more than $|2^\mathbb N|+|\mathbb N|=|\mathbb R|$. Repeat the operations above for finite many times and consider all possible leading term of the latest sequence, where the candidates has the cardinality no more than $|\mathbb N|\cdot |\mathbb R|=|\mathbb R|$. Thus the cardinality of Borel measurable sets $\leq |\mathbb R|$. 
>
> Since $\{\{x\}\}_{x\in \mathbb R}$ is the set of Borel sets of cardinality $|\mathbb R|$, the cardinality of Borel measurable sets is exactly $|\mathbb R|$. 

**Proposition** There exists a measurable set which is non-Borel measurable.

> **Proof** The cardinality of measurable set is no less than $|2^\mathbb R|$ by taking subsets of some uncountable null set (e.g., Cantor set); whereas the cardinality of Borel measurable sets is $|\mathbb R|$. 

