---
title: 分析 09-Nov-2023
date: 2023-11-09 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Banach spaces

**Theorem** (Uniform boundedness principle) Let $X$ be a complete metric space and $\mathscr F\subset C(X;\mathbb R)$. Assume that $\forall x\in X$, $\exists M_x<\infty$ s.t. $f(x)\leq M_x$ for any $f\in \mathscr F$. Then $\exists U\subset X$ (non-empty open set) and $M<\infty$ s.t.  $f(x)\leq M$ for any $x\in U$ and $f\in \mathscr F$

> **Proof** Set 
> $$
> E_n:=\{x\in X:\sup_{f\in \mathscr F} f(x)\leq n\}.
> $$
> Then $E_n$ is an open set, since $X\setminus E_n$ is clearly open. By the property of uniformly boundedness for each $x$, we have that $\bigcup_{n\geq 1}E_n$ is $X$. Now [BCT] illustrates that at least one of the $E_n$'s has non-empty interior. In final, we take an open set $U\subseteq E_n$ which completes the proof. 

**Definition** The norm of a linear map between normed-linear spaces, e.g., $T:(X,\|\bullet\|_X)\to (Y,\|\bullet\|_Y)$ is defined as 
$$
\sup_{x\in X\setminus \{0\}}\frac{\|Tx\|_Y}{\|x\|_X}\in [0,\infty].
$$
**Definition** For normed $\mathbb F$-vector spaces $X$ and $Y$, we define

* $\mathcal L(X,Y)$ the vector space of $\mathbb F$-linear maps;
* $\mathcal B(X,Y)$ the vector space of bounded $\mathbb F$-linear maps.

Clearly, $\mathcal B(X,Y)$ is a sub-space of $\mathcal L(X,Y)$.

**Definition** $X^\ast :=\mathcal B(X,\mathbb F)$ is the set of bounded linear functionals of $X$, known as the topology dual space. 

**Definition** $X^\ast :=\mathcal L(X,\mathbb F)$ is the set of linear functionals of $X$, known as the algebraic dual of $X$. 

**Definition** Banach space is complete normed linear space. 

**Proposition** If $X$ and $Y$ are normed linear spaces, then so is $\mathcal B(X,Y)$. Moreover, if $Y$ is complete, and so is $\mathcal B(X,Y)$. 

> **Proof** The norm of $\mathcal B(X,Y)$ is defined as usual, i.e.,
> $$
> \|T\|:=\sup_{x\in X\setminus \{0\}}\frac{\|Tx\|_Y}{\|x\|_X}=\sup_{\|x\|_X=1}\|Tx\|_Y.
> $$
> To see that $\|T\|$ is a norm, 
>
> * $\|T\|=0$ whenever $T$ maps the unit ball to $0\in Y$ yielding that $T$ is a zero map;
> * $\|T+S\|=\sup_{\|x\|_X=1}\|Tx+Sx\|_Y\leq \sup_{\|x\|_X=1}\|Tx\|_Y+\sup_{\|x\|_X=1}\|Sx\|_Y=\|T\|+\|S\|$; 
> * $\|aT\|=\sup_{\|x\|_X=1}\|aTx\|_Y=|a|\sup_{\|x\|_{X}=1}\|Tx\|_Y=|a|\cdot \|T\|$. 
>
> Furthermore, if $Y$ is complete, then for any fixed $x$ and convergent $\{T_n\}_{n\geq 1}$, the limit $\{T_nx\}$ exists in $Y$. We see that $\lim_{n\to\infty}T_n$ is also a bounded linear operator. 

**Proposition** The topology dual of Banach space is also Banach. 

**Proposition** $\mathcal B(Y,Z)\circ \mathcal B(X,Y)\subseteq \mathcal B(X,Z)$. 

> **Proof** In fact, $\|S\circ T\|\leq \|S\|\cdot \|T\|$. 

**Theorem** (open mapping) Let $T:X\to Y$ is surjective continuous linear maps between Banach spaces, then $T$ maps open sets to open sets. 

> **Proof** Consider $B_n$ the closed ball with origin $O$ and radius $r$ in $X$. Then 
> $$
> \bigcup_{n\geq 1} T(B_n)=Y. 
> $$
> By [BCT], there exists some $T(B_n)$ which contains an open set $U$. Hence, $-U\subseteq T(B_n)$. WLOG let $U\cap (-U)=\varnothing$. It yields that $T(B_{2n})$ contains an open ball $U-U$, which contains the origin. Therefore, for any open ball $B_r(x)$, $T(B)$ contains some open balls of the form $B_\delta(Tx)$. 
>
> To see that $T$ is open, we take $W$ the open set in $X$ and take any $y\in T(W)$. Since there exists $x\in U$ s.t. $Tx=y$, there exists some $\varepsilon>0$ s.t. $B_\varepsilon(x)\subseteq W$. Hence, there exists $\delta >0$ s.t. $B_\delta (Tx)\subseteq T(W)$, yielding that $T(x)$ is a interior point of $T(W)$. 

**Proposition** If $T\in \mathcal B(X,Y)$ is a bijection, then $T^{-1}\in \mathcal B(Y,X)$. Hence, $T$ is a isomorphism of Banach spaces. 

**Proposition** (Successive approximation lemma) Let $X$ be a Banach space, $Y$ be a normed vector space, $T\in \mathcal B (X,Y)$. Suppose there exists $0<\varepsilon <1$ and $M>0$ s.t.
$$
\operatorname{dist}(y,T(B_X(0,M)))<\varepsilon\quad (\forall y\in B_Y(0,1)).  
$$
Then $B_Y(0,1)\subseteq T(B_X(0,M(1-\varepsilon)^{-1}))$. 

> **Proof** We fix $y\in B_Y(0,1)$ and solve for $x$ s.t. $y=Tx$ and $\|x\|<M(1-\varepsilon)^{-1}$. First we find $x_1\in B_X(0,M)$ s.t. $\|y-x_1\|<\varepsilon$. Then consider $\varepsilon^{-1}(y-Tx_1)\in B_Y(0,1)$ and $x_2\in B_X(0,M)$ s.t. 
> $$
> \|\varepsilon^{-1}(y-Tx_1)-Tx_2\|<\varepsilon.
> $$
>  Hence, $\|y-Tx_1-\varepsilon Tx_2\|<\varepsilon^2$. By induction we have that
> $$
> \left\|y-\sum_{n\geq 1}\varepsilon ^{n-1}x_n\right\|=0.
> $$
> Here we have the convergent Cauchy sequence
> $$
> \sum_{n\geq 1}\varepsilon^{n-1}x_n\in B_X(0,M(1-\varepsilon)^{-1}).
> $$





