---
title: 分析 28-Sept-2023
date: 2023-10-07 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Some applications in probability

**Proposition** (Borel-Cantilli) 

1. Let $\{A_n\}$ be events s.t. $\sum_{n\geq 1}\mathrm{Prob}(A_i)<\infty$. Then almost surely only finite many of these events may occur, i.e., 
$$
\mathrm{Prob}(\limsup_{n\to\infty}A_n)=\mathrm{Prob}(\bigcap_{n\geq 1}\bigcup_{k\geq n}A_k)=0.
$$
2. If $\{A_n\}$ are independent, and $\sum_{n\geq 1}\mathrm{Prob}(A_n)=\infty$, then a.s. infinitely many events occur. 

> **Proof** 
> 1. This is trivial and direct. 
> 2. For arbitrary fixed $N\in \mathbb N$, the probability of all bu first $N$ events never occurs is 
> $$
> \mathrm{Prob}(\bigcap_{n>N}A_n^c)=\prod_{n>N}\mathrm{Prob}(A_n^c)=\prod_{n>N}(1-\mathrm{Prob}(A_n))=0.
> $$

**Theorem** (Weak law of large numbers) Let $f_i:[0,1]\to \{\pm 1\}$ be i.i.d. s.t. 
$$
\mathrm{Prob}(\{f_i=1\})=\mathrm{Prob}(\{f_i=-1\})=\frac 12.
$$
Write $S_n:=\frac 1n\sum_{i\geq 1}f_i$, and then $\forall \varepsilon>0$, we have 
$$
\lim_{n\to\infty}\mathrm{Prob}(|S_n|>\varepsilon)= 0.
$$
> **Proof** Consider 
> $$
> \int_0^1|S_n|^2\operatorname d\mathrm{Prob}=\frac 1{n^2}\int_0^1\sum_{i,j\leq n}f_if_j\operatorname d\mathrm{Prob}=\frac 1n,
> $$
> since $f_i$'s are i.i.d.. Therefore, 
> $$
> \mathrm{Prob}(S_n^2>\varepsilon^2)\leq \dfrac{1}{n\varepsilon^2}.
> $$

**Theorem** (SLLN) $S_n\to 0$ is $\mathrm{Prob}$-a.e..
> **Proof** Set $g_n:=\sum_{k\leq n}\frac{f_k}k$ and $f_0=g_0=0$. Then
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> S_n&=n^{-1}\sum_{1\leq k\leq n}k(g_k-g_{k-1})\\[6pt]
> &=g_n-n^{-1}\sum_{1\leq k\leq n}g_{n-1}
> \end{align*}
> $$
> We hope that $g_n\to g_\infty<\infty$ a.e. and so that $S_n\to 0$ a.e.. For fixed $k$, we have that
> $$
> \begin{align*}
> \mathrm{Prob}(\sup_{i\geq 1}|g_{k+i}-g_k|\geq \varepsilon)&\leq \sum_{i\geq 1}\mathrm{Prob}(|g_{k+i}-g_{k+i-1}|\geq \varepsilon)\\[6pt]
> &\leq \dfrac{1}{\varepsilon^2}\sum_{j\geq 1}\dfrac{1}{(k+j)^2}.
> \end{align*}
> $$
> Therefore, 
> $$
> \mathrm{Prob}(\sup_{i,j\geq N}|g_{i}-g_j|\geq \varepsilon)\leq \dfrac{2}{\varepsilon^2}\sum_{j\geq 1}\dfrac{1}{(N+j)^2}<\infty.
> $$
> Let $A_{N,\varepsilon}$ be the event $\{\sup_{i,j\geq N}|g_i-g_j|<\varepsilon\}$. Then 
> $$
> \{g_\infty<\infty\}=\bigcap_{m\geq 1}\bigcup_{N\geq 1}A_{N,1/m}.
> $$
> Since $\mathrm{Prob}(\bigcup_{N\geq 1}A_{N,\varepsilon})=1$ for arbitrary $\varepsilon=1/m$, 
> $$
> \lim_{m\to\infty}\mathrm{Prob}(\bigcup_{N\geq 1}A_{N,1/m})=\mathrm{Prob}(\bigcap_{m\geq 1}\bigcup_{N\geq 1}A_{N,1/m})=1.
> $$

**Definition** We call $x\in [0,1]$ is weakly normal, if any finite string of digits occurs infinitely many often in its decimal expression. Write $x\in \mathscr N$. 

**Proposition** $\mathscr L^1([0,1])=1$. 
> **Proof** Let $E_i$ be $\{x\in [0,1]\text{ with }i\text{-th digit }1\}$. Then $\mathscr L^1(E_i)=\frac 1{10}$ and $E_i$'s are independent. Therefore, a.e. infinite many events ($E_i$'s) occur. Let $A_n$ be the event that $n\in \mathbb N$ occurs. We know that
> $$
> \mathrm{Prob}(\bigcap_{k\leq N} A_k)=1\quad (\forall N\in \mathbb N). 
> $$
> The rest of the proof is clear. 

## Littlewood's principles.

**Theorem** (Egoroff) For $\{f_n:[a,b]\to \mathbb R\}$ such that $f_n\to f$ a.e.. pointwise, then $\forall \varepsilon >0$, there exists a Borel set $F\subset [a,b]$ such that

* $\mathscr L^1([a,b]\setminus F)<\varepsilon$,
* $f_n\to f$ uniformly on $F$.

>  **Proof** Consider $\delta_n(x):=\sup_{k\geq n}|f_k(x)-f_n(x)|$. Then $\delta_n(x)\searrow 0$ a.e. pointwise. For every $\nu\in \mathbb N_+$, there exists $n(\nu)\in \mathbb N$ such that 
> $$
> \mathscr L^1(\{\delta_{n(\nu)}>\nu^{-1}\})<\frac \varepsilon{2^\nu}.
> $$
> WLOG, assume $n(\nu)\nearrow \infty$. Finally we consider  
> $$
> [a,b]\setminus F=\bigcup_{\nu\geq 1} \{\delta_{n(\nu)}>\nu^{-1}\}.
> $$
> The proof is similar if $f_n$'s are defined on a $\sigma$-finite sets e.g., $\mathbb R$.

**Proposition** *Nearly* cannot be replaced by *almost*. Consider $f_n(x)=1_{[n,n+1]}$. 

> *Nearly*: exists for arbitrary fixed $\mu(-)=\varepsilon>0$; 
>
> *Almost*: exists for $\mu(-)=\varepsilon =0$. 

**Proposition** (Littlewood's three principles of real analysis) 

1. Every measurable set is *nearly* a finite disjoint union of open sets, and almost a $G_\delta$ set or $F_\sigma$ set. 
2. (Egoroff) Pointwise convergence is *nearly* uniformly convergence. 
3. (Luzin) Every function is continuous *nearly* on its domain. 

## Differentiation

**Example** Continuous function that is nowhere differentiable: consider 
$$
f(x)=\sum_{n\geq 1}a_n\sin (b_n x),
$$
where $\sum a_n$ converges and $a_nb_n\to n$ rapidly. Now we fix $n$, $x$, and choose $\Delta x=b_n^{-1}$. Then 
$$
\begin{align*}
\Delta \left(\sum_{k<n}a_k\sin (b_kx)\right)&\leq \sum_{k<n}\dfrac{a_kb_k}{b_n}\ll a_n,\\[6pt]
\Delta \left(\sum_{k\geq n}a_k\sin (b_kx)\right)&\leq \sum_{k\geq n}a_n.
\end{align*}
$$
We see that $\Delta f(x)\to 0$ as $\Delta x\to 0$, thus is convergent. However, 
$$
\dfrac{\Delta f(x)}{\Delta x}\geq \dfrac{a_n}{b_n^{-1}}=a_nb_n\to \infty.
$$

> It is initially constructed by Riemann that
> $$
> f(x)=\sum_{n\in \mathbb Z}\frac{e^{2\pi i n^2 x}}{n^2}\in C^0(\mathbb R),
> $$
> whereas $f'(x)$ exists for $x\in \mathbb Q$ but nowhere continuous. 

**Theorem** A monotonic function $f:[a,b]\to \mathbb R$ is a.e. differentiable. 

**Proposition** (Vitali covering lemma) Let $K$ be compact metric space covered by collection of balls $\mathscr B$. WLOG, suppose that $\mathscr B$ is finite, then there exists a collection of disjoint balls $\{B_i\}_{1\leq i\leq N}\subset\mathscr B$ s.t. $K\subset \bigcup_{1\leq i\leq N} 3B_i$. Here $3B(x_0,r):=B(x_0,3r)$. 

> **Proof** Keep on finding the $k$-th ball $B_k\in \mathscr B\setminus \bigcup_{i\leq k-1} B_i$ with largest radius such that $B_i$'s are non-overlapping. 
