---
title: 分析 17-Oct-2023
date: 2023-10-17 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## BV

**Definition** We compare the function on $[a,b]\in \mathbb R$ and measure. 

* (Function) [AC] function: $\{F:F=\int F'\}\subseteq \mathbb M-\mathbb M=$ [BV] function. 
* (Measure) [AC] measure: $\{\mu:\mu=\underset{\text{integrable}}f\operatorname d\mathscr L^1\}\subseteq \{\nu^+-\nu^-\}= $ signed measure with bounded variation. 

**Theorem** Consider the isometric isomorphism induced by derivative operator
$$
D:[\mathrm{AC}]([a,b])/\mathbb R\overset\sim \longrightarrow\mathscr L^1([a,b]),\quad F\mapsto F^\prime.
$$
The inverse operator is 
$$
I:\mathscr L^1([a,b])\to [\mathrm{AC}]([a,b])/\mathbb R,\quad F\mapsto \mathbb R+\int_a^xF(y)\operatorname dy.
$$

> **Proof** First, $I$ is injective, i.e., for any $\int_a^xF(y)\operatorname dy$ constant, we consider 
> $$
> \mathscr F:=\{E:\int_Ef\operatorname d\mathscr L^1=0\}.
> $$
> By construction, $\mathscr F\subseteq\mathscr B_{\mathbb R}$. If $f\neq 0$ a.e., then there exists an open interval s.t. either $f>0$ or $f<0$ on it. Then we shall prove the following lemma.
>
> **Lemma** $D(If)=f$ for $f\in \mathscr L^\infty([a,b])$. 
>
> > Consider 
> > $$
> > D:\mathrm{Lip}([a,b])/\mathbb R\to \mathscr L^1.
> > $$
> > Here $\mathrm{Lip}([a,b])$ consists of Lipschitz functions defined on $[a,b]$. Now suppose $|f|\leq M$, we see that $F:=If$ is Lipschitz by direct verification. To see that $D(If)=f$, we show that
> > $$
> > \int_a^x((If)^\prime (y)-f(y))\operatorname dy=0\quad (\forall x\in [a,b]).
> > $$
> > Set $F_n(x):=n[F(x+1/n)-F(x)]$ ($F(b+x)=F(b)$ for $x\geq 0$), then $F_n(x)\to F$ pointwise. Since $F$ is totally bounded, then by [DCT], 
> > $$
> > \begin{align*}
> > \int_a^x((If)^\prime (y)-f(y))\operatorname dy&=\lim_{n\to\infty}\int_a^xn [F(y+n^{-1})-F(y)]-f(y)\operatorname dy\\[6pt]
> > &=\lim_{n\to\infty}n\int_x^{x+1/n}F(y)\operatorname dy-\int_a^{1/n}F(y)\operatorname dy-\int_a^xf(y)\operatorname dy\\[6pt]
> > &=\lim_{t\to 0^+}\dfrac{1}{t}\int_x^{x+t}F(y)\operatorname dy-\int_a^xf(y)\operatorname dy\\[6pt]
> > &=0.
> > \end{align*}
> > $$
>
> Finally we show that $D(If)=f$ for $f\in \mathscr L^1$. Indeed, WLOG $f\geq 0$, consider $f_n(x):=\min\{f(x),n\}\in \mathscr L^\infty\cap \mathscr L^1$, then $f_n\nearrow f$. By [MCT], $\int f_n\to \int f$. The lemma reveals that $(If_n)'=f_n$ since $f_n$'s are bounded. Hence, 
> $$
> (If)(x)=(IDIf)(x)\geq \lim_{n\to\infty}(If_n)(x)\overset{\mathrm{[MCT]}}=(If)(x).
> $$
> The equality holds everywhere. To see that $IDF=F$ for any $F$ [AC]. Since $DI$ is identical and $I$ is injective, we show that $D$ is also injective, i.e., if there exists $F$ [AC] s.t. $F'=0$ a.e., then $F$ is constant. If not, then the monotonous function $G(x):=\max_{0\leq t\leq x}F(t)$ which is continuous and has zero derivative a.e.. Therefore, $G(x)$ is constant and so is $F$. 

**Theorem** $[\mathrm{AC}]([a,b])$ is a closed subspace of $[\operatorname{BV}]([a,b])$, the latter is a Banach space equipped with the norm
$$
\|G\|_{\mathrm{BV}}:=\|G\|_{\mathscr L^\infty}+V_a^b(G).
$$
**Proposition** We see that $[\mathrm{AC}]([a,b])/\mathbb R$ is a Banach space with norm $V_a^b$.

> In fact, $V_a^b(f)=\|f^\prime\|_{\mathscr L^1}$. 

**Example** Here we consider [BV] function for $\mathbb R^d$ with $d\geq 1$. Geometrically, $1_\Omega$ is [BV] in $\mathbb R^d$ whenever $D1_\Omega$ is a (vector-valued) measure supported on $\partial \Omega$. We require $\Omega$ to have finite perimeter. 

## Signed measure

**Proposition** The space of measures $\widetilde M:=\{\mu:(X,\mathscr F)\to \mathbb R_+\}$ is semi-linear, i.e., 

* for $\mu,\nu\in \widetilde M$, $(\mu+\nu):E\mapsto \mu(E)+\nu(E)$ is also in $\widetilde{M}$;
* for $\lambda\in [0,\infty[$, $\lambda \mu:E\mapsto \lambda \mu(E)$ is also in $\widetilde M$. 

> **Proof** By direct verification.

**Definition** (Signed measure) The space of signed measures is the smallest vector space spanned by $\widetilde M$. 

> Equivalently, $\nu$ is a signed measure whenever
>
> 1. $\nu(\varnothing)=0$,
> 2. $\nu$ is $\sigma$-additive,
> 3. $\nu$ attains only one of $\pm \infty$. 

**Definition** Let $\nu$ be signed measure on $(X,\mathscr F)$. We say $E\in \mathscr F$ is a pointwise set, if either $\nu(\widetilde E)\geq 0$ or $\nu(\widetilde E)\leq 0$ holds uniformly for all $\widetilde E\in \mathscr F$ ($\widetilde E\subseteq E$). 

> We can always pull out the maximal positive set of $\nu$. 

**Theorem** (Hahn decomposition) Let $(X,\mathscr F,\nu)$ be a signed measure space, we can decompose $X=P\sqcup N$ where $P$ (resp., $N$) is pointwise positive (w.r.t. negative). Furthermore, if $X=\widetilde P\sqcup \widetilde N$ is another valid pair, then both $P\Delta \widetilde P$ and $N\Delta \widetilde N$ are null. 

