---
title: 分析 07-Nov-2023
date: 2023-11-07 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Baire category theory

**Definition** Given $X$ the non-empty complete metric space. Say $E\subseteq X$ is non-where dense, whenever $\operatorname {Int}(\overline E)=\varnothing$. 

**Definition** Say $E$ is meagre (equi. of 1st category), whenever $E$ is a countable union of non-where dense sets. 

**Definition** Say $E\subseteq X$ is residual, whenever $X\setminus E$ is meagre. 

**Definition** Say $E\subseteq X$ is of the 2nd category, whenever $E$ is not meagre. 

**Example** Both $\mathbb Q$ and $C$ (Cantor set) are of 1st category (w.r.t. $X=\mathbb R$). 

**Theorem** (Baire category theory ([BCT])) Given $X$ the non-empty complete metric space, let $\{U_n\}_{n\geq 1}$ be sequence of dense open subsets in $X$. Then $\bigcap_{n\geq 1} U_n$ is a dense $G_\delta$ subset of $X$. 

> **Proof** It is sufficient to show that any open subset $U\subseteq X$ contains some $x\in \bigcap _{n\geq 1}U_n$. First we take a close ball $B_1$ in $U_1\cap X$, since $X$ is a metric space. Then take the closed ball $B_2\subseteq B_1$ such that $B_2\subseteq U_1\cap U_2\cap X$. It is clear that one can always take the sequence of closed balls
> $$
> B_k\subseteq X\cap \bigcap_{1\leq i\leq k}U_i,
> $$
> such that $B_1\supseteq B_2\supseteq \cdots \supseteq B_k\supseteq \cdots $. In final we take $x\in \bigcap_{n\geq 1}B_n$. 

**Proposition** $E\subseteq X$ is residual, whenever $E$ contains a dense $G_\delta$-set. 

> **Proof** $\Leftarrow $ is clear. Conversely, $X\setminus E=\bigcup_{n\geq 1}F_n$ is a countable union of non-where dense sets. Hence, $E=\bigcap_{n\geq 1}(X\setminus F_n)$. We notice that 
> $$
> \operatorname {int}(X\setminus F_n)= X\setminus \overline {F_n}
> $$
> is an open subset of $X$, and 
> $$
> \overline {X\setminus \overline{F_n}}=X\setminus \operatorname {int}(\overline F_n)=X.
> $$
> Hence, 
> $$
> E\supseteq \bigcap_{n\geq 1} (\operatorname{int}(X\setminus F_n)), 
> $$
> which is dense in $X$ via [BCT]. 

**Proposition** The complement of a meagre set is dense. 

**Proposition** Every non-empty metric space is non-meagre itself. 

> **Proof** If not, then there exists countable non-where dense set $\{K_n\}_{n\geq 1}$ s.t. $X=\bigcup_{n\geq 1}K_n$. Since $\overline {K_n}$ is also non-where dense, we suppose that $K_n$'s are closed without the loss of generality. Therefore, 
> $$
> \varnothing=X\setminus X=\bigcap_{n\geq 1} (X\setminus K_n)
> $$
> is dense by [BCT], a contradiction. 

**Proposition** Let $X$ be a complete, non-empty metric space without isolated points. Then each dense $G_\delta$-set in $X$ is uncountable. 

> **Proof** Let $A:=\bigcap _{n\geq 1}O_n$ be the dense $G_\delta$ set, then each $O_n$ is dense and open in $X$. If $A$ is countable, then we write $A=\bigcup_{n\geq 1}\{a_n\}$. It yields that $\varnothing=\bigcap_{n\geq 1}(O_n\setminus \{a_n\})$ is a dense $G_\delta$ set, which contradicts to our assumption. 

**Proposition** Each residual space in a Banach spaces is uncountable. 

**Proposition** Every subset in $(\mathbb Q,\|\cdot \|_2)$ is both meagre and residual. 

> **Proof** Since any $X\subseteq \mathbb Q$ is a countable union of one-point sets, both $X$ and $\mathbb Q\setminus X$ is meagre, which means $X$ is both meagre and residual. 

**Example** For $f:\mathbb R\to \mathbb R$, we define
$$
O(x):=\liminf_{r\searrow 0^+}\operatorname {diam}(f(B_r(x))).
$$
Then $\{x\in \mathbb R:O(x)<\varepsilon\}$ is open. In fact, for arbitrary $O(x_0)<\varepsilon$, there exists $r_0$ s.t. $\operatorname{diam}(f(B_{r_0}(x_0)))<\varepsilon$. Therefore, $\operatorname {diam}(f(B_{r_0/2})(x))<\varepsilon$ for arbitrary $|x-x_0|<r_0/2$. 

Hence, the set of continuous points is $G_\delta $, i.e., 
$$
\bigcap_{n\geq 1}\{O(x)<1/n\}. 
$$
**Proposition** There exists no functions $f:\mathbb R\to \mathbb R$ only disjoint at irrational points

> **Proof** $\mathbb Q$ is not a $G_\delta$ set, since it is dense and countable. 

**Definition** Say $x\in [0,1]\setminus \mathbb Q$ is Liouville, whenever for any $n\in \mathbb N$, there exists $p/q\in \mathbb Q$ s.t. 
$$
|x-p/q|<q^{-n}.
$$
**Proposition** Liouville numbers are transcendental. 

> **Proof** For any algebraic number $z$, i.e., $P(z)=0$ where $P(z)$ is the monic minimal polynomial. WLOG, let $P'(z)\neq 0$. Then there exists $C$ and $\varepsilon>0$ s.t. for any $p/q\in B_\varepsilon(z)$, 
> $$
> |z-p/q|\geq C|p(z)-P(p/q)|\geq \frac{C}{q^{\deg P}}.
> $$

**Definition** Say $x\in [0,1]\in \mathbb Q$ is $\alpha$-Diophantine, iff there exists $C$ s.t.
$$
|x-p/q|> C/q^\alpha\quad (\forall p/q\in \mathbb Q). 
$$
| Sets in $\mathbb R$            | Cardinality   | Topology | Measure |
| ------------------------------ | ------------- | -------- | ------- |
| $\mathbb Q$                    | $|\mathbb N|$ | Meagre   | Null    |
| Cantor set                     | $|\mathbb R|$ | Meagre   | Null    |
| Liouville numbers              | $|\mathbb R|$ | Residual | Null    |
| $\mathbb R\setminus \mathbb Q$ | $|\mathbb R|$ | Residual | Full    |

**Theorem** For arbitrary fixed $\varepsilon >0$, the set of $(2+\varepsilon)$-Diophantine points in $[0,1]$ measures $1$. However, the set of Liouville points in $[0,1]$ is residual on $[0,1]$. 

**Theorem** (Uniform Bounded Principle) Let $X$ be a complete non-empty compact metric space. Let $\mathscr F$ be a collection of continuous functions $f:X\to \mathbb R$ s.t. 
$$
\sup_{f\in \mathscr F} f(x)\leq M_x<\infty\quad (\forall x\in X).
$$
Then there exists an non-empty open set in $X$ and $M<0$ s.t. 
$$
\sup_{f\in \mathscr F,x\in X}f(x)\leq M.
$$

> **Proof** For any open set $U\subseteq X$, define 
> $$
> X_n:=\{x\in U:\sup_{f\in \mathscr F}f(x)\leq n\}.
> $$
> We claim that $X_n$ is closed. In fact, for any $x$ s.t. $\sup_{f\in \mathscr F} f(x)>n$, there exists $\varepsilon >0$ and $g\in \mathscr F$s.t. $g(x)>n+\varepsilon$. Since $g$ is continuous, there exists an open neighbourhood of $x$ taking values $> n+\varepsilon/2$. Therefore, $U\setminus X_n$ is open. 
>
> Since $\bigcup_{n\geq 1} X_n=U$, there exists an open subset $V\subseteq U$ and $N\in \mathbb N_+$, s.t. $X_N\cap V$ is dense in $V$. By continuity, $\sup_{f\in \mathscr F,x\in V}f(x)$ has a uniform upper bound. Since $X$ is compact, we complete the proof. 

**Proposition** (Uniform boundedness principle for Banach spaces) Let $\{T_i\}_{i\in I}$ be collection of linear operators from Banach space $X$ to the normed linear space of second category $Y$. If for every $x\in X$, 
$$
\sup_{i\in I}\|T_ix\|<\infty,
$$
then there exists $M>0$ s.t.
$$
\sup_{\|x\|\leq 1,i\in I}\|T_ix\|=\sup_{i\in I}\frac{\|T_ix\|}{\|x\|}<M.
$$

> **Proof** We define the closed set 
> $$
> E_n:=\{x\in X:\sup_{i\in I}\|T_ix\|\leq n\}.
> $$
> If $\sup_{i\in I}\|T_i\|<\infty$, then  $\bigcup_{n\in \mathbb N}=X$. By BCT, there exists $n$ s.t. $E_n$ contains an non-empty interior $U$. We take the open ball $B_r(x_0)$ s.t. $r<\|x_0\|/2$. Then
> $$
> \sup_{i\in I}\frac{\|T_ix\|}{\|x\|}\leq \frac{n}{\|x_0\|-r}\leq \frac{2n}{\|x_0\|}.
> $$
> Hence, the proposition is proven. 
