---
title: 分析 21-Sept-2023
date: 2023-09-21 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Integration

**Definition** (measurable) Let $(X,\mathscr F)$ and $(Y,\mathscr G)$ are measurable sets. We say $f:X\to Y$ is $(\mathscr F/\mathscr G)$-measurable iff $f^{-1}(E)\in \mathscr F$ for arbitrary $E\in \mathscr G$. 

> Always pull back the sets and push forward the measures.

**Proposition** Continuous functions are Borel-measurable. 

**Proposition** Measurability is invariant under compositions. 

**Definition/Convention** We say $f:(X,\mathscr F)\to \mathbb F$ is measurable, whenever $f$ is $\mathscr F/\mathscr B_{\mathbb F}$-measurable. Here $\mathbb F$ is either $\mathbb R$ or $\mathbb C$. 

**Definition/Convention** We say $f:\mathbb F\to \mathbb F$ is Lebesgue measurable whenever $f$ is $\mu_{\mathscr L^1}/\mathscr B_{\mathbb F}$ measurable. Here $\mathbb F$ is either $\mathbb R$ or $\mathbb C$. 

**Definition** Let $X$ be a set, $\{(Y_\alpha,\mathscr G_\alpha)\}_{\alpha\in I}$ be any family of measurable spaces, and $f_\alpha:X\to Y_\alpha$ be functions. The $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\{f_\alpha\}_{\alpha\in I}$ on $X$ is the smallest $\sigma$-algebra where all $f_\alpha$'s are measurable, i.e., 
$$
\sigma\left(\{f_\alpha^{-1}(E_\alpha)\mid E_\alpha\in \mathscr G_\alpha,\alpha\in I\}\right). 
$$

**Proposition** Consider 
$$
f:(X,\mathscr F)\to \left(\prod_{\alpha\in I}Y_\alpha,\bigotimes_{\alpha\in I}\mathscr G_\alpha\right)=:(Y,\mathscr G). 
$$
$f$ is $\mathscr F/\mathscr G$-measurable whenever each $\pi_\alpha$ is $\mathscr F/\mathscr G_\alpha$-measurable. 

**Example** $f:(X,\mathscr F)\to \mathbb C$ is measurable whenever both $\mathrm{Re}(f)$ and $\mathrm{Im}(f)$ is (Borel) measurable. Furthermore, $(+,-,\cdot ,/)$ is closed under the set of measurable functions (on $S^2$).

**Proposition** $f_j:(X,\mathscr F)\to \overline{\mathbb R}:=\mathbb R\cup\{\infty\}$ are measurable, then so are
$$
\sup f_j,\quad \inf f_j, \quad \limsup f_j, \quad \liminf f_j.
$$
Here $\overline{\mathbb R}$ is nothing but a set, $\mathscr B_{\overline {\mathbb R}}=\{E\mid E\cap \mathbb R\in \mathscr B_{\mathbb R}\}$. 
> **Proof** If $\sup f_j(x)>\alpha$, then $f_{j_0}(x)>\alpha$ for some $j_0$. Therefore, 
> $$
> (\sup f_j)^{-1}(]\alpha,\infty[)=\bigcup_{j} f_j^{-1}(]\alpha,\infty[). 
> $$
> For $\limsup f_j$, we have that
> $$
> (\limsup_{j\to\infty} f_j)^{-1}(]\alpha,\infty[)=\bigcap_{j} \bigcup_{k\geq j}f_k^{-1}(]\alpha,\infty[). 
> $$
> $\inf f_j$ and $\liminf_{j\to\infty} f_j$ is similar. 

**Proposition** If $f:(X,\mathscr F)\to \overline{\mathbb R}$ is measurable, then so are
$$
f_+(x):=\max\{f(x),0\},\quad f_-(x):=\min\{f(x),0\}.
$$

**Definition/Convention** (measurable set) A set $E$ is measurable whenever $E\in \mathscr F$. 

**Proposition** Clearly, $1_E:(X,\mathscr F)\to \overline{\mathbb R},\quad x\mapsto \begin{cases}1&x\in E,\\0&x\notin E\end{cases}$ is measurable whenever $E\in\mathscr F$. 

**Definition** (simple function) A simple function on $(X,\mathscr F)$ is a finite $\mathbb C$-linear combination of indicator functions of sets in $\mathscr F$, i.e., 
$$
\varphi=\sum_{\text{finite}}\alpha_i1_{E_i},\quad E_i\in \mathscr F,\alpha_i\in \mathbb C. 
$$
> In other words, $\mathcal H^0(\mathrm{image}(f))<\infty$. 

> For canonical representation, we assume $E_i$'s are pair wisely disjoint. 

**Theorem** Let $(X,\mathscr F)$ be a measurable space and $f:X\to [0,\infty]$ be measurable. Then there exists a sequence of simple functions $\{\varphi_n\}_{n\in \mathbb N}$ such that 
$$
\lim_{n\to\infty}\varphi_n(x)=f(x)\quad \text{pointwisely on }X,
$$
and $\varphi_i(x)\leq \varphi_j(x)$ for arbitrary $i\leq j$ and $x\in E$. If $f$ is bounded, then the approximation is uniform. 
> **Proof** For arbitrary $n\in \mathbb N$, define $\varphi _n(x)=\min\left(\dfrac{\lfloor 2^n x\rfloor}{2^n},n\right)\cdot 1_{[-2^n,2^n]}$. 

**Definition** (Lebesgue integration for non-negative measurable functions) Fix $(X,\mathscr F,\mu)$ the measurable space. The Lebesgue integration makes sense if

1. The integral of simple function: $\displaystyle \int_X\varphi\mathrm d\mu=\sum_{\text{finite}}\alpha_i1_{E_i}=\sum_{\text{finite}}\alpha_i\mu(E_i)$ when $E_i$'s are pairwise disjoint; 
2. For simple integrable function $\varphi,\psi$, we have that $\displaystyle\int_X \psi\mathrm d\mu\geq \int_X\varphi\mathrm d\mu$ if $\psi\geq \varphi$;
3. $\displaystyle\int_X f\mathrm d\mu=\lim_{n\to\infty}\int_X\varphi _n\mathrm d\mu$ for $\varphi_n\nearrow f$ in the previous theorem;
4. For $f$ integrable, we have that $\displaystyle \int_Xf\mathrm d\mu=\int_X f^+\mathrm d\mu-\int_X-f^-\mathrm d\mu$. 

**Proposition** The integral is a linear functional
$$
\int_X()\mathrm d\mu: \mathscr L^0((X,\mathscr F,\mu);\mathbb C)\to \overline{\mathbb R}.
$$
Here 
$$
\int_Xf\mathrm d\mu=\int_X\mathrm{Re}(f)\mathrm d\mu+\sqrt{-1}\int_X\mathrm{Im}(f)\mathrm d\mu. 
$$
**Theorem** (monotonous convergence theorem) Let $\{f_n\}\subset \mathscr L^0_+(X,\mathscr F,\mu)$ be such that $f_n\leq f_{n+1}$. Then $\int_X\mathrm d\mu$ commutes with $\lim_{n\to\infty}$, i.e., 
$$
\lim_{n\to\infty}\int_Xf_n\mathrm d\mu=\int_X\lim_{n\to\infty}f_n\mathrm d\mu.
$$
