---
title: 分析 19-Oct-2023
date: 2023-10-19 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Signed Measure

**Theorem** (Hahn decomposition) Let $\nu$ be a signed measure on $(X,\mathscr F)$. We can decompose $X=P\sqcup N$ such that $\nu$ is positive on $P$ and negative on $N$ in a essentially unique manner. 

> Assume the above. We consider $\nu^+=\nu \mathscr L_p$, i.e., $\nu^+(E)=\nu(E\cap P)\geq 0$ for any $E\subseteq \mathscr F$, and $-\nu^-$ is similar. Then $\nu=\nu^+-\nu^-$ where $\nu^\pm$ are positive measures. This is known as the Jordan decomposition of signed measures. 

> **Proof** 
>
> **Part I.** WLOG assume $\nu:\mathscr F\to\,\, ]-\infty,\infty]$. We claim that 
>
> > if $\nu(D)\leq 0$, then there is a negative set $A\subseteq D$ such that $\nu(A)\leq \nu(D)$. 
>
> Set 
> $$
> m:=\sup\left\{\nu(B):B\in \mathscr F,B\subseteq D\right\}.
> $$
> Clearly $m\geq \nu(\varnothing)=0$. We take $B\subseteq D$ such that $\nu(B)\geq \min\{1,m/2\}$. Now define
>
> * the sequence of sets $\cdots \subseteq A_{n+1}\subseteq A_n\subseteq \cdots \subseteq A_0$, such that $A_0=D$, $A_{n+1}:=A_n\setminus B_n$ for $n\geq 0$;
>
> * the sequence of disjoint sets $\{B_i\}_{i\in \mathbb N}$, such that $B_0=B$, $B_n\subseteq A_n$ with $\nu(B_n)\geq \min\{1,m_n/2\}$;
>
> * the sequence $\{m_i\}_{i\in \mathbb N}$, such that $m_0=m$, and 
>   $$
>   m_i:=\sup\left\{\nu(X):X\in \mathscr F,X\subseteq A_n\right\}. 
>   $$
>
> Finally we set $A:=D\setminus \bigcup_{i\in \mathbb N}B_i$, and thus 
> $$
> \nu(A)=\nu(D)-\sum_{i\in \mathbb N}\nu(B_i)\leq \nu(D).
> $$
> To see that $A$ is a negative set, we assume there exists $B\subseteq A$ measurable such that $\nu(B)>0$. Then $\sum_{i\geq 1} m_i=+\infty$, which contradicts $\nu(D)\leq 0$. 
>
> **Part II.** We take the negative set $N\subseteq X$ for the decomposition as follows. We define the sequence $\{(A_i,D_i,N_i,s_i)\}_{i\in \mathbb N}$ such that
>
> * $N_0=\varnothing$ and $N_{n+1}:=N_n\cup A_n$;
> * $s_n=\operatorname {inf}\left\{\nu(E):E\in \mathscr F,E\subseteq (N_n)^c\right\}$; 
> * $D_n\subseteq (N_n)^c$ such that $\nu(D_n)\leq \max(-1,s_N/2)\leq 0$; 
> * $A_n\subseteq D_n$ such that $\nu(A_n)\subseteq \nu(D_n)$ and $A_n$ is negative (by the previous claim). 
>
> Then $\{A_i\}_{i\in \mathbb N}$ are disjoint. We claim that $N:=\bigcup_{i\in \mathbb N}A_i$ is the desired negative set in Hahn's decomposition.
>
> * $N$ is a negative set by definition;
>
> * $(N)^c$ is a positive set, otherwise assume there exists $B\subseteq (N)^c$ with negative measure, then 
>   $$
>   \nu(N)=\sum_{i\in \mathbb N}\nu(A_i)\leq \sum_{i\in \mathbb N}\max\{-1,s_n/2\}=\infty\cdot \nu(B)=-\infty,
>   $$
>   a contradiction. 
>
> **Part III** For the uniqueness in $\triangle$'s manner, we suppose both $(N,P)$ and $(\overline N,\overline P)$ are Hahn decomposition of $X$, then 
> $$
> P\triangle \overline  P=N\triangle\overline N=(P\cap \overline N)\cup(N\cap \overline P)
> $$
> is $\nu$-null. 

**Definition** The positive measure $|\nu|:=\nu^++\nu^-$ is known as the total variation of $\nu$. 

**Proposition** For $E\in \mathscr F$,
$$
|\nu|(E)=\sup\left\{\sum_{k\in \mathbb N}|\nu(E_i)|:E=\bigsqcup_{k\in \mathbb N}E_k,\quad E_k\in \mathscr F\right\}.
$$
**Proposition** $E\in \mathscr F$ is $\nu$-null, whenever it is $|\nu|$-null. 

> **Proof** If $E$ is not $\nu$-null, then there exists a subset $E^\prime \subset E$ with non-zero measure. Then $|\nu|(E)\geq |\nu(E^\prime)|> 0$. Conversely, if $E$ is $\nu$-null, then for arbitrary partition $E=\bigsqcup_{k\in \mathbb N}E_k$, we have that $\nu(E_k)=0$. Therefore, 
> $$
> |\nu|(E)=\sup 0=0.
> $$

**Definition** We say the positive measure $\mu$ and $\nu$ are said to be mutually singular if there exist two sets $A$ and $B$ in the sigma algebra $\mathscr{F}$ such that:

1. $A \sqcup B = X$, where $X$ is the entire sample space.
2. $\mu(A) = 0$ (meaning that $\mu$ assigns zero measure to a set $A$).
3. $\nu(B) = 0$ (meaning that $\nu$ assigns zero measure to a set $B$).

When these conditions are met, we say that $\mu$ and $\nu$ are mutually singular, and we write $\mu \perp \nu$.

**Definition** We say the signed measure $\mu$ and $\nu$ are mutually singular, if there exist two sets $A$ and $B$ in the sigma algebra $\mathscr{F}$ such that:

1. $A \sqcup B = X$, where $X$ is the entire sample space.
2. $\mu(A\cap E) = 0$ for any $E\in \mathscr F$ (meaning that $\mu$ assigns zero measure to any subset $A$).
3. $\nu(B\cap E) = 0$ for any $E\in \mathscr F$ (meaning that $\nu$ assigns zero measure to any subset $B$).

**Example** $\nu^+$ and $\nu^-$ are mutually singular. 

**Proposition** For any signed measure $\nu$ and positive measure $\mu$, $\nu\perp \mu$ whenever $|\nu|\perp \mu$, whenever $\nu^\pm \perp \mu$. 

> **Proof** If $\nu\perp \mu$, then there exists $A\sqcup B=X$ such that $\nu(A\cap E)=0$ and $\mu(B\cap E)=0$ for any $E\in \mathscr F$. Now considering $E\in \{P,N\}$, we have that $|\nu|\perp \mu$ and $\nu^\pm \perp \mu$. 
>
> If $|\nu|\perp \mu$, then $\nu\perp \mu$. This is due to $|\nu|(E)=0\implies \nu(E)=0$ for arbitrary $E\in \mathscr F$. 
>
> If $\nu^+$ and $\nu^-$ are mutually singular to $\mu$, then we take $X=A^+\sqcup B^+=Z^-\sqcup B^-$, such that $\nu^\pm (E\cap A^\pm)=\mu(E\cap B^\pm)=0$. Therefore, 
> $$
> |\nu|(E\cap A^+\cap A^-)=0,\quad \mu(E\cap (B^+\cup B^-))=0.
> $$
> It yields that $|\nu|\perp \mu$. 

**Proposition** $\nu(E)=\int_E(1_P-1_N)\operatorname d|\nu|$. 

**Definition** $\mathscr L^1(\nu)=\mathscr L^1(\nu^+)\cap \mathscr L^1(\nu^-)$ for signed measure $\nu$. Then, 
$$
\int_Xf\operatorname d\nu=\int_Xf\operatorname d\nu^+-\int_Xf\operatorname d\nu^-,\quad (\forall f\in \mathscr L^1(\nu)).
$$
**Definition** We say $\nu$ is absolutely continuous w.r.t. $\mu$, if $\mu(E)=0$ implies $\nu(E)=0$ for $E\in \mathscr F$. Write $\nu\ll \mu$. 

**Example** Suppose $\mu$ is a non-negative measure. For $f\in \mathscr L^1(\mu)$ and set $\nu(E):=\int_Ef\operatorname d\mu$, $E\in \mathscr F$, we have $\nu\ll \mu$. Conversely, assume that $\nu\ll \mu$, then $\int_E\operatorname d\nu=\nu(E)=\int_Ef\operatorname d\mu$, that is, $\operatorname d\nu=f\operatorname d\mu$. 

**Example** Set $\mu=\mathscr L^1([a,b])$ and $E=[a,x]\subseteq [a,b]$. Then 
$$
\nu(E)=\int_a^xf(y)\operatorname dy,
$$
which is [AC] w.r.t. the domain. 

**Definition** For $\nu$ signed measure $\ll \mu$ positive measure on $(X,\mathscr L)$, such that $v(E)=\int_Ef\operatorname d \mu$ ($f\in \mathscr L^1(\mu)$), we write
$$
f=\dfrac{\operatorname d\nu}{\operatorname d\mu}.
$$
This is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of $\nu$ w.r.t. $\mu$. 

**Theorem** For signed measure $\nu$ and finite measure $\mu$ on $(X,\mathscr F)$, whenever $\nu\ll \mu$, the following statement holds true:

> for arbitrary small $\varepsilon>0$, there exists $\delta>0$ such that $|\nu(E)|<\varepsilon$ whenever $\mu(E)<\delta$. 

> **Proof** $\Longrightarrow$ Suppose that $\varepsilon$-$\delta$ statement fails, we consider a sequence $\{E_n\}_{n\geq 1}$ such that $|\nu(E_n)|\geq \varepsilon$ while $\mu(E_n)\leq 1/n^2$. WLOG assume that $\nu(E_n)>0$. Then 
> $$
> \mu\left(\lim_{k\to\infty}\bigcup_{n\geq k} E_n\right)\leq \lim_{k\to\infty}\mu\left(\bigcup_{n\geq k}E_n\right)=0.
> $$
> However, since $\mu(X)<\infty$​, we have that
> $$
> \mu\left(\lim_{k\to\infty}\bigcup_{n\geq k} E_n\right)=\lim_{k\to\infty}\mu\left(\bigcup_{n\geq k} E_n\right)\geq \varepsilon.
> $$
> $\Longleftarrow$ Suppose that $\nu\ll \mu$ fails, there exists $E\in \mathscr F$ such that $\nu(E)\neq 0$ while $\mu(E)=0$. Hence, $\varepsilon$-$\delta$ statement fails either.

**Theorem** (Lebesgue-Radon-Nikodym) Let $\nu$ be $\sigma$-finite measure and $\mu$ be $\sigma$-finite positive measures on $(X,\mathscr F)$, then there exists a unique pair of $\sigma$-finite measures $(\nu^{\mathrm{ac}},\nu^{\mathrm s})$​ such that
$$
\nu=\nu^{\mathrm{ac}}+\nu^{\mathrm s},\quad \nu^{\mathrm{s}}\perp\mu,\quad \nu^{\mathrm{ac}}\ll \mu,\quad \nu^{\mathrm{ac}}(E)=\int_Ef\operatorname \mu\quad (f\in \mathscr L^1(\mu)).
$$
**Proposition** For $\nu$ a signed measure and $\mu$, $\lambda$ measures on $(X,\mathscr F)$. If $\nu\ll \mu$ and $\mu\ll \lambda$, then $\nu\ll \lambda$. We also have the chain rule $\frac{\operatorname d\nu}{\operatorname d\lambda}=\frac{\operatorname d\nu}{\operatorname d\mu}\frac{\operatorname d\mu}{\operatorname d\lambda}$, which is $\lambda$-a.e..

> **Proof** Clear for the first statement. For the latter, we consider 
> $$
> \int_X1_E\frac{\operatorname d\mu}{\operatorname d\lambda}\operatorname d\lambda=\int_E\frac{\operatorname d\mu}{\operatorname d\lambda}\operatorname d\lambda=\mu(E)=\int_E\operatorname d\mu=\int_X1_E\operatorname d\mu.
> $$
> Similarly, we have
> $$
> \int_X1_E\frac{\operatorname d \nu}{\operatorname d\lambda}\operatorname d\lambda=\int_X1_E\operatorname d\nu=\int_X1_E\frac{\operatorname d\nu}{\operatorname d\mu}\operatorname d\mu=\int_X1_E\frac{\operatorname d\nu}{\operatorname d\mu}\frac{\operatorname d\mu}{\operatorname d\lambda}\operatorname d\lambda.
> $$
> Therefore, $\frac{\operatorname d\nu}{\operatorname d\lambda}=\frac{\operatorname d\nu}{\operatorname d\mu}\frac{\operatorname d\mu}{\operatorname d\lambda}$, which is $\lambda$-a.e..
