---
title: 分析 14-Nov-2023
date: 2023-11-14 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 分析
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Mapping theorems

**Theorem** Let $X$ and $Y$ be Banach spaces and $T\in \mathcal B(X,Y)$. If $T$ is on-to, then $T$ is open. If $T$ is also one-to-one, then $T^{-1}\in \mathcal B(Y,X)$. 

**Definition** For $T:X\to Y$ the linear map, we define the graph $\Gamma_T:=\{(x,Tx):x\in X\}$ as a subspace of $X\times Y$. 

**Proposition** The closed subspace $Z$ of Banach space $X$ is also a Banach space. 

> **Proof** The Cauchy sequence converging in $Z$ always has an accumulation point in $X$. Since $Z$ is closed, such accumulation points is also in $Z$. 

**Theorem** Let $X$ and $Y$ be Banach spaces, and $T\in \mathcal L(X,Y)$. Then $T\in \mathcal B(X,Y)$ whenever $\Gamma_T$ is closed in $X\times Y$. Here the norm of $X\times Y$ is given by $\|(x,y)\|_{X\times Y}=\|x\|_X+\|y\|_Y$. 

> **Proof** $\Rightarrow$ Suppose that $T$ is bounded, we shall prove that $(X\times Y)\setminus \Gamma_T$ is open. For $(x,y)$ s.t. $y\neq Tx$, we claim that there exists $\delta =\frac{\|Tx-y\|}{3\|T\|}$ and $\varepsilon =\frac{\|Tx-y\|}{3}$ s.t. 
> $$
> B_{\min (\delta ,\varepsilon )}(x,y)\subseteq (X\times Y)\setminus \Gamma_T.
> $$
> Here we take arbitrary $(x',y')\in B_{\min (\delta ,\varepsilon )}(x,y)$, and find that 
> $$
> \|y'-Tx'\|\geq \|y-Tx\|-\|y-y'\|-\|Tx-Tx'\|\geq \frac{\varepsilon }{3}. 
> $$
> Hence, $B_{\min (\delta ,\varepsilon )}(x,y)$ is an open neighbourhood of $(x,y)$ outside $\Gamma_T$. 
>
> $\Leftarrow$ Now suppose that $\Gamma_T$ is closed and thus is a Banach subspace of $X\times Y$. Consider the projection $\pi_X:\Gamma_T\to X,(x,Tx)\mapsto x$. We see that $\pi$ is one-to-one with norm $\leq 1$. By theorem of inverse mapping, we see that $\pi_X^{-1}:X\to \Gamma_X$ is also bounded linear. In final we consider the composition 
> $$
> \left[X\overset T\longrightarrow Y\right]=\left[X\overset {\pi^{-1}_X}\longrightarrow \Gamma_X\overset{\pi_Y}\longrightarrow Y\right].
> $$

**Example** The open mapping theorem fails for non-complete space. For instance, let $c_{00}$ be the linear space of real numbers sequences with finite many non-zero entries, along with the norm $\|\bullet\|_\infty$. Then 
$$
T:c_{00}\to c_{00},\quad (x_n)_{n\geq 1}\mapsto (n^{-1}x_n)_{n\geq 1}
$$
is bounded linear bijective with norm $1$. However, the inverse 
$$
T:c_{00}\to c_{00},\quad (x_n)_{n\geq 1}\mapsto (nx_n)_{n\geq 1}
$$
has norm $\infty$. 

**Theorem** A Banach space has either finite or uncountable large Hamel basis.

> **Proof** We only discuss $\infty$-dim Banach space. Any normed linear space with countable Hamel basis is an countable union of finite vector sub-spaces, which is no-where dense. Therefore, by [BCT], a Banach space never has countable infinite many Hamel basis. 

**Example** Let $c_0$ be the linear space of convergent real sequences with norm $\|\bullet\|_\infty$​. Then 
$$
T:c_{0}\to c_{0},\quad (x_n)_{n\geq 1}\mapsto (n^{-1}x_n)_{n\geq 1}
$$
is injective and continuous. It yields that $T:c_0\to T(c_0)$ is bijective and linear. By inverse mapping theorem, $T(c_0)$ is never a Banach space, thus $T(c_0)$ is not closed in $c_0$. 

**Proposition** Let $T\in \mathcal B(X,Y)$ be continuous linear map between Banach spaces. $T$ is injective with closed range, whenever there exists $c>0$ s.t. $\|Tx\|\geq c\|x\|$. 

> **Proof** If $T$ is injective with closed range, then $TX\subseteq Y$ is Banach space. Hence, $T:X\to TX$ is a bijection between Banach spaces (clearly, $TX\neq 0$). Let $T^{-1}:TX\to X$ be its inverse, which is also bounded with norm $c^{-1}$. Therefore, 
> $$
> \|x\|=\|T^{-1}Tx\|\geq c^{-1}\|Tx\|.
> $$
> Conversely, if $\|Tx\|\geq c\|x\|$ for some $c>0$, then $T$ is injective. Since there exists $M=\|T\|$ s.t. 
> $$
> M\|x\|\geq \|Tx\|\geq c\|x\|,
> $$
> we see that $T^{-1}:TX\to X$ is a linear map s.t. $c^{-1}\|y\|\geq \|T^{-1} y\|\geq M^{-1}\|y\|$, yielding that $T^{-1}\in \mathcal B(Y,X)$. Since every Cauchy sequence in $TX$ has convergent pre-image with accumulating point in $X$, we see that $TX$ is closed in $Y$. 

**Definition** Say $|\bullet |\lesssim \|\bullet\|$ on $X$, whenever there exists $C>0$ s.t. $|x|\leq C\|x\|$ for $x\in X$.  

**Proposition** Let both $|\bullet|$ and $\|\bullet\|$ be norms on $X$, such that $(X,|\bullet|)$ and $(X,\|\bullet\|)$ be both Banach spaces. Then $|\bullet|\lesssim\|\bullet\|$ whenever $\|\bullet\|\lesssim |\bullet|$. 

> **Proof** For symmetry, we only prove $\Leftarrow$. Consider the identical map of sets, 
> $$
> \varphi:(X,|\bullet|)\to (X,\|\bullet\|),\quad x\mapsto x.
> $$
> Then $\varphi$ is a continuous bijection between Banach spaces. By inverse mapping theorem, $\varphi^{-1}$ is continuous, and thus $|\bullet|\lesssim\|\bullet\|$. 

**Proposition** Let $T\in \mathcal L(\mathscr H)$ be a linear endomorphism of Hilbert space $\mathscr H$. If $(Tx,y)=(x,Ty)$, then $T\in \mathcal B(\mathscr H)$. 

> **Proof** For every fixed $y\in \mathscr H$, and for all $\|x\|=1$, we have that 
> $$
> |(Tx,y)|=|(x,Ty)|=\|Ty\|<\infty
> $$
> Then $\{(Tx,-)\}_{\|x\|=1}$ is uniformly bounded for $\|y\|=1$, by uniformly bounded theorem. Hence, $T$ is bounded. 

**Proposition** Let $X$ be a (resp., complete) normed vector space with closed subset $Z$. Then $Z/X$ is also a (resp., complete) normed vector space, with norm induced by the quotient space. Hence, we have the following decomposition
$$
\left[X\overset T\longrightarrow Y\right]=\left[X\overset \pi\twoheadrightarrow X/\ker T\overset\sim \longrightarrow \operatorname{range}T\overset \iota\hookrightarrow Y\right].
$$
