---
title: 微分流形与微分几何 21-Sept-2023
date: 2023-09-21 17:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 微分几何
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Submanifold

**Definition** (rank) Set $F:M^n\to N^m$, 
$$
\mathrm dF_p:T_pM\to T_pN,\quad [\gamma]\mapsto [F\circ \gamma].
$$
Then we have that
$$
\mathrm dF_p=\sum_{i,\alpha}\dfrac{\partial (\psi\circ F\circ \varphi^{-1})^\alpha}{\partial x^i}\cdot \dfrac{\partial }{\partial y^\alpha}\otimes \mathrm d x^i.
$$
Define the rank function $\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm dF_\bullet):M\to \mathbb N$. 

**Definition** (immersion) when $\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm d F_p)=n\leq m$ is a constant, then $F$ is an immersion at $p$. If $F$ is an immersion at arbitrary $p\in M$, then $F$ is an immersion of $M$. 

> An immersion is locally an embedding for arbitrary $p\in M$. First an immersion yields a bijection locally via inverse mapping theorem. The continuous bijection on an open set yields an homeomorphism, thus is an embedding locally. 

**Example** ($\mathbb R\hookrightarrow T^2$ and $\mathbb R\to \bigcirc\!\bigcirc$) 

**Definition** (immersed/embedding submanifold) For differential map $\varphi :M\to N$,

1. We say $(M,\varphi)$ is an immersed submanifold of $N$, if $\varphi$ is immersed every where; 
2. We say $(M,\varphi)$ is an embedding submanifold of $N$, if $\varphi :M\to \varphi (M)$ is a homeomorphism w.r.t. subspace topology of $N$. 

> Embedding submanifold $=$ regular submanifold. See regular curve, surface, etc.

**Theorem** Injective immersion $+$ compact domain $\implies $ embedding. 

> **Proof** 

**Definition** (tangent bundle) The collection $TM:=\bigcup_{p\in M}T_pM$ is called the tangent bundle. 

**Definition** (vector field) $V:M\to TM$, $p\mapsto v\,\,(\in T_p M)$ is a vector field. We say $V$ is differentiable whenever
$$
V(q)=\sum_{1\leq i\leq n}\dfrac{\partial }{\partial x^i}\cdot V^i(q)
$$
has $n$-differentiable coordinates. 

**Definition** (Lie bracket) $\mathscr X(M):=(\{\text{differential vector bundle on }M\},[,])$, where
$$
[X,Y]f:=X(Yf)-Y(Xf). 
$$
**Example** $[fX,gY]h=fX(gY h)-gY(fXh)=f(Xg)(Yh)-g(Yf)(Xh)$. 

**Proposition** For $Y=\sum Y^i\cdot \dfrac{\partial }{\partial X^i}$, and $Z=\sum Z^i\cdot \dfrac{\partial }{\partial X^i}$, we have that 
$$
[Y,Z]=\sum \left(Y^i\cdot \dfrac{\partial Z^j}{\partial X^i}-Z^i\cdot \dfrac{\partial Y^j}{\partial X^i}\right)\cdot \dfrac{\partial }{\partial X^j}.
$$
