---
title: 微分流形与微分几何 23-Oct-2023
date: 2023-10-23 17:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 微分几何
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Vector bundles

**Definition** $TM:=\bigcup _{p\in M}T_pM$ is the tangenet bundle of $M$. 

**Proposition** $TM$ is an $n$-dimensional manifold if $M$ is an $n$-dimensional manifold. 
> **Proof** Take a coordinate cover $\{U_\lambda(x_\lambda^1,\ldots, x_\lambda^n),\varphi _\lambda\}$ of $M$. Set the function of pointwise projection
> $$
> \pi:TM\to M,\quad v_q\mapsto q\quad (v_q\in T_qM).
> $$
> Set $\psi_\lambda:\pi^{-1}(U_\lambda)\to U_\lambda\times \mathbb R^n$ by defining
> $$
> \psi_\lambda :\sum_{i=1}^nv^i\frac{\partial }{\partial x^i}\mapsto (q,(v^1,\ldots, v^n)).
> $$
> The topology of $TM$ is endowed by the continuous map $\psi_\lambda$'s. We claim that $\{(\pi^{-1}(U_\lambda),\psi_\lambda)\}_{\lambda\in \Lambda}$ is an open cover of $TM$ and gives the differentiable structure. For $U_\lambda\cap U_\mu\neq 0$, the transformation map
> $$
> \psi_\mu\circ \psi_\lambda^{-1}:(U_\lambda\cap U_\mu)\times \mathbb R^n\to (U_\lambda\cap U_\mu)\times \mathbb R^n
> $$
> is a homomorphism given by 
> $$
> (q,(v^1_\lambda,\ldots, v^n_\lambda))\mapsto (q,(v_\mu^1,\ldots ,v_\mu^n)).
> $$
> Here 
> $$
> \sum_iv_\lambda^i\frac{\partial }{\partial x_\lambda^i} = \sum_{i,j}v_\lambda^i\frac{\partial (\psi_\mu\circ \psi_\lambda^{-1})^j}{\partial x_\lambda^i}\frac{\partial }{\partial x_\mu^j}=\sum_jv_\mu^j\frac{\partial}{\partial x_\mu^j}.
> $$
> given the differentiability of $\psi_\mu\circ \psi_\lambda^{-1}$. In fact, 
> $$
> （\psi_\mu\circ \psi_\lambda^{-1}) |_{\{q\}\times \mathbb R^n}=\left(\frac{\partial (\psi_\mu\circ \psi_\lambda^{-1})^i}{\partial x_\lambda^j}\right)_q\in GL(n,\mathbb R). 
> $$

**Definition** Let $E$ and $M$ be $(n+d)$-dimensional and $n$-dimensional differential manifold, $\pi:E\to M$ is a differentiable surjective map. Call the triple $(E,M,\pi)$ (briefly, $E$) a (real) vector bundle of rank $d$ over $M$, if there exists an open cover $\{U_\lambda\}_{\lambda\in \Lambda}$ of $M$ and a family of diffeomorphisms $\{\psi_{\lambda}:\pi^{-1}(U_\lambda)\to U_\lambda\times \mathbb R^n\}$ s.t.,
1. $\forall q\in U_\lambda$, $\psi_\lambda(\pi^{-1}(q))=\{q\}\times \mathbb R^d$;
2. if $U_\lambda\cap U_\mu\neq \varnothing$, then there exists a differentiable map $\psi_{\lambda,\mu}:U_\lambda\cap U_\mu\to GL(d,\mathbb R)$ s.t. $\forall (q,v)\in (U_\lambda\cap U_\mu)\times \mathbb R^d$, 
$$
(\varphi_\mu\circ \varphi_\lambda^{-1})(q,v)=(q,\psi_{\lambda,\mu}(q)v). 
$$

**Definition** For triple $(E,M,\pi)$, $\pi^{-1}$ is called the fibre of $E$ at $q\in M$. 

**Proposition** Locally, $TU_\lambda\cong U_\lambda\times \mathbb R^d$, which is called a trivialisation. 

**Proposition** $\{\varphi_{\lambda,\mu}\}_{\lambda,\mu\in \Lambda}$ satisfies the following

1. $(\varphi_{\lambda,\lambda})_p=\mathrm{id}_{T_{p}M}= I_d$ is identical for $p\in U_\lambda$;
2. $\varphi_{\lambda,\mu}\cdot \varphi_{\mu,\lambda}=\varphi_{\mu,\lambda}\cdot \varphi_{\lambda,\mu}$ is identical on $U_\lambda\cap U_\mu\neq \varnothing$;
3. $\varphi_{\lambda,\mu}\cdot \varphi_{\mu,\nu}\cdot \varphi _{\nu,\lambda}$ is identical on $U_\lambda\cap U_\mu\cap U_\nu\neq \varnothing$. 

**Proposition** Any collection $\{\varphi_{\lambda,\mu}\}_{\lambda,\mu\in \Lambda}$ satisfying the above properties uniquely determines a vector bundle. 
> **Proof** Consider the equivalence relation on $\bigcup_{\lambda\in \Lambda}U_\lambda\times \mathbb R^d$, s.t.
> $$
> (q_1,v_1)\sim (q_2,v_2)\Leftrightarrow (q_1=q_2)\wedge (\exists \,\psi_{\lambda,\mu}(q)v_1=v_2).
> $$

**Definition** (Bundle map) Let $E_1\overset{\pi_1}\longrightarrow M$ and $E_2\overset{\pi_2}\longrightarrow M$ be vector bundles. Say $F:E_1\to E_2$ is a bundle map, whenever 
$$
F:\pi_1^{-1}(q)\to \pi_2^{-1}(q)
$$ 
is linear and a inclusion.  

**Definition** Call $F$ an isomorphism form $E_1$ to $E_2$, whenever $F$ is also a diffeomorphism. 