---
title: 微分流形与微分几何 19-Oct-2023
date: 2023-10-19 17:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 微分几何
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Domain with boundary

**Definition** We say $D\subseteq M$ is a domain with boundary in $M$, if for arbitrary $p\in D$, we have either

* there exists an open neighbourhood $U\subset D$, or

* there exists a coordinate $(U(x^1,\ldots,x^n),\varphi)$​ such that
  $$
  \varphi(p)=0,\quad U\cap D=\{q\in U:x^n(q)\leq 0\}.
  $$
  Here $p$ is the boundary point. 

**Proposition** All boundary points consists of an $(n-1)$-dimensional embedding differential manifold in $M$.

> **Proof** Write $B:=\partial D$. For coordinate system 
> $$
> \{(U_\alpha(x_\alpha^1,\ldots, x_\alpha^n),\varphi_\alpha)\}_{\alpha\in \Lambda},\quad \{(U_\beta(x_\beta^1,\ldots, x_\beta^n),\varphi_\beta)\}_{\beta\in \Lambda},
> $$
> and take $p\in B$. Then the transition map $\varphi_\alpha\circ \varphi_\beta^{-1}$ restricted on $B\cap (U_\alpha\cap U_\beta)$ is also differentiable. Therefore, $\{(U_\alpha\cap B,\varphi|_{x^n=0})\}$ is also a coordinate system. 

**Proposition** If $M$ is orientable, then the boundary manifold is also orientable together with the induced orientation. 

> **Proof** For orientation $\omega_0=f_0 \operatorname dx^1\wedge \cdots \wedge \operatorname dx^n$ and $p\in B$, we consider the coordinate systems
> $$
> \{(U_\alpha(x_\alpha^1,\ldots, x_\alpha^n),\varphi_\alpha)\}_{\alpha\in \Lambda},\quad \{(U_\beta(x_\beta^1,\ldots, x_\beta^n),\varphi_\beta)\}_{\beta\in \Lambda},
> $$
> such that $x_\alpha(p)=x_\beta(p)=0$. The Jacobian of $\varphi_\beta\circ \varphi_\alpha^{-1}$ on $U_\alpha\cap U_\beta$ is 
> $$
> J_{\varphi_\beta\circ \varphi_\alpha^{-1}}=
> \begin{pmatrix}
> \frac{\partial x_\beta^1}{\partial x_\alpha^1}&\cdots &\frac{\partial x_\beta^1}{\partial x_\alpha^{n-1}}&\frac{\partial x_\beta^1}{\partial x_\alpha^{n}}\\
> \vdots&\ddots &\vdots&\vdots\\
> \frac{\partial x_\beta^{n-1}}{\partial x_\alpha^{1}}&\cdots &\frac{\partial x_\beta^{n-1}}{\partial x_\alpha^{n-1}}&\frac{\partial x_\beta^{n-1}}{\partial x_\alpha^{n}}\\
> \frac{\partial x_\beta^{n}}{\partial x_\alpha^{1}}&\cdots &\frac{\partial x_\beta^{n}}{\partial x_\alpha^{n-1}}&\frac{\partial x_\beta^{n}}{\partial x_\alpha^{n}}
> \end{pmatrix}.
> $$
> Here $\frac{\partial x_\beta^n}{\partial x_\alpha^k}=0$ for $1\leq k\leq n-1$. By definition of half plane, we have that $\frac{\partial x_\beta^n}{\partial x_\alpha^n}>0$, and thus the determinant is positive. 

**Definition** Consider $M^n$ with orientation $\omega_0$. Suppose that $\omega$ is an $n$-form such that $\overline{\operatorname {supp}(\omega)}\subset M$ is compact. Given partition of unity $\{(U_\alpha,\varphi_\alpha,f_\alpha)\}$, we define the integral
$$
\int_M\omega :=\sum_{\alpha\in \lambda} \int_Mf_\alpha\omega\quad (\text{finite sum}).
$$
**Proposition** The above integral $\int_M \omega$ is independent of the charts. 

> **Proof** Let $\{(V_i(y_i^1,\ldots, y_i^n),\psi_i,g_i)\}_{i\in I}$ and $\{(U_\alpha(x_\alpha^1,\ldots, x_\alpha^n),\varphi_\alpha, f_\alpha)\}_{\alpha\in \Lambda}$ be two coordinate systems with partitions of unity. Then 
> $$
> \int_M\omega =\sum_{i}\left(\sum_\alpha\int_Mg_if_\alpha\omega\right) =\sum_i\left(\sum_\alpha\int_M f_ig_\alpha\omega\right).
> $$
> is independent of the the choice of coordinates. 

**Theorem** Let $M^n$ be orientable with $\omega_0$, $D$ is a compact domain with smooth boundary. Let $\omega$ be an $(n-1)$ form on $M$, then 
$$
\int_{\partial D} \omega =\int_D\operatorname d\omega.
$$

> **Proof** 



