---
title: 拓扑 27-Sept-2023
date: 2023-09-27 20:30:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 流形的几何与拓扑
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Chain Complex

**Definition** (Chain complex) We say $\{(C_q,\partial _q)\}$ is a chain complex, if

* $C_q$'s are Abelian groups and $\partial _q$'s are group homomorphisms;

* the sequence of homomorphisms
  $$
  \cdots \overset{\partial_{q+2}}\longrightarrow C_{q+1}\overset{\partial_{q+1}}\longrightarrow C_{q}\overset{\partial_{q}}\longrightarrow \cdots 
  $$
  satisfies $\partial_q\circ \partial_{q+1}=0$ for every $k$.

We define

* $Z_q:=\mathrm{ker}(\partial _q)$ consisting of $q$-cycles;
* $B_q:=\mathrm{im}(\partial_{q+1})$ consisting of $q$-boundaries; 
* $H_q:=Z_q/B_q$ is called $q$-th cohomological group of the chain complex (here $B_q\subset Z_q\subset C_q$). 

**Definition** (Homomorphisms of chain complices) 
$$
f=\{f_q\}:\{(C_q,\partial _q^C)\}\to \{(D_q,\partial _q^D)\}
$$
is a $q$-morphism, whenever each 
$$
\begin{matrix}
\qquad C_{q+1}&\overset {\partial_q^C}\longrightarrow& C_q\quad\\
f_{q+1}\downarrow&\circlearrowright&\downarrow f_q\\
\qquad D_{q+1}&\underset {\partial_q^D}\longrightarrow& D_q\quad\\
\end{matrix}
$$
commutes. 

> Here $\left\{\left(C_q\overset {\partial _q^C}\longrightarrow D_q,(\partial_q^C,\partial _q^D)\right)\right\}$ is also a chain complex. 

**Proposition** $f$ induces a $\mathbb Z$-mod homomorphism
$$
f_\ast:H_q(C)\to H_q(D),\quad [z_q]\mapsto [f_q(z_q)].
$$

> **Proof** To see that $f_\ast$ is well-defined, we take arbitrary $b\in B_q(C)$, then
> $$
> \partial_{q-1}^C f_q(b)=f_{q-1}(\partial_q^D b)=0.
> $$
> Therefore $f_q:B_q(C)\to B_q(D)$, yielding that $f_\ast$ is well-defined. Then consider the decomposition $B_q(C)\oplus H_q(C)\simeq Z_q(C)$ The rest is clear. 

**Definition** (Regular chain simplices) Given $X$ a topological space, we define 
$$
\Delta_q=\{(x_0,\ldots, x_n)\in E^{q+1}:x_0+\cdots +x_q=1,x_i\geq 0\}. 
$$
 A continuous map $\sigma:\Delta_q\to X$ is a singular simplex. 

**Definition** (Singular $q$-chain group) Define the singular $q$-chain group $S_q(X)$ to be the collection of formal sums 
$$
S_q(X):=\left\{\sum_{\text{finite}} k_i\sigma_q^{(i)}:k_i\in \mathbb Z\right\}.
$$

> Here $S_q$ is also a free Abelian group whose basis consists of all singular $q$-simplices. 

**Definition** $\partial_q:S_q(X)\to S_{q-1}(X)$ is a group homomorphism given by
$$
\sigma_q\mapsto \sum_{i=0}^q(-1)^i \sigma_q\circ (e_0\cdots \widehat{e_i}\cdots e_q).
$$
Here $(e_0\cdots \widehat{e_i}\cdots e_q): \Delta_{q-1}\to \Delta_q$ maps

* $j$-th vertex of $\Delta_{q-1}$ to the $j$-th of $\Delta_q$, if $j<i$, 
* $j$-th vertex of $\Delta_{q-1}$ to the $j$-th of $\Delta_q$, if $j>i$.  

**Proposition** For chain complex $S_\ast (X)=\{(S_q(X),\partial_q)\}$, we also have $\partial_{q-1}\circ \partial_q=0$ for $q\in \mathbb Z$. 

>  **Proof** Consider
>  $$
>  \begin{align*}
>  \partial_{q-1}\circ \partial_q(\sigma_q)&=\partial_{q-1}\sum_{i=0}^q(-1)^i \sigma_q\circ (e_0\cdots \widehat{e_i}\cdots e_q),\\[6pt]
>  &=\sum_{0\leq j<i\leq n}(-1)^{i+j} \sigma_q\circ (e_0\cdots\widehat{e_j}\cdots \widehat{e_i}\cdots e_q)\\[6pt]
>  &\quad +\sum_{0\leq i<j\leq n}(-1)^{i+j-1} \sigma_q\circ (e_0\cdots\widehat{e_i}\cdots \widehat{e_j}\cdots e_q)\\[6pt]
>  &=0.
>  \end{align*}
>  $$

**Proposition** $S_\ast(X):=\{(S_q(X),\partial _q)\}$ is a chain complex, here $H_q(X)$ the $q$-th homology group of $X$ is $0$ when $q<0$. 

**Example** Consider $X=\{pt\}$ the singular point set, then $S_q(X)\cong \mathbb Z$, and
$$
\sigma:\Delta_q\to X
$$
is constant. Therefore we deduce 
$$
\cdots \overset{\partial _k}\longrightarrow \mathbb Z \overset{\partial _{k-1}}\longrightarrow \mathbb Z\longrightarrow \cdots \longrightarrow \mathbb Z\overset{\partial_1}\longrightarrow \mathbb Z\overset{\partial_0}\longrightarrow 0.
$$
Here 

* $\partial_1:S_1\to S_0,\quad \sigma\mapsto \sigma(e_1)-\sigma(e_0)=0$;
* $\partial_2:S_2\to S_1,\quad \sigma\mapsto \sigma(e_1e_2)-\sigma(e_0e_2)+\sigma(e_0e_1)=\sigma$.

Therefore, $H_0(X)=\mathbb Z$ and $H_q(X)=0$ ($q\geq 1$). 

**Proposition** If $X$ is path connected, then $H_0(X)\cong \mathbb Z$. 

> **Proof** Consider $\operatorname{im}\partial_1$, consisting of 
> $$
> \sum_{\text{fitite sum}} c_j\sigma_j\quad (\sum_{\text{fitite sum}} c_j=0).
> $$
> Then $H_0\cong \dfrac{S_0(X)}{\operatorname{im}\partial_1}=\dfrac{S_0(X)}{\operatorname{ker}\varepsilon}\cong  \operatorname{ker} \varepsilon \cong \mathbb Z$​. Here 
> $$
> \varepsilon:S_1\to \mathbb Z,\quad \sum_{\text{fitite sum}} c_j\sigma_j\mapsto \sum_{\text{fitite sum}} c_j.
> $$

**Proposition** For $X=\bigsqcup _{\lambda\in \Lambda}X_\lambda$, we have that
$$
H_q(X)\cong \bigoplus_{\lambda\in \Lambda}H_q(X_\lambda). 
$$

> **Proof** Consider $S_q(X)=\bigoplus_{\lambda\in \Lambda}S_q(X_\lambda)$, and $\partial_q:S_q(X_\lambda)\to S_{q-1}(X_\lambda)$. 

**Proposition** The continuous map $f:X\to Y$ gives $f_\sharp:S_q(X)\to S_q(Y)$, via
$$
\sum_{\text{finite sum}}c_k\sigma_k\mapsto \sum_{\text{finite sum}}c_kf\circ \sigma_k.
$$
Therefore we can define $S_q\left(X\overset f\longrightarrow Y\right)$. 

**Example** If $f:X\to Y$ is an homeomorphism, then $f_\sharp$ is an isomorphism. 

**Proposition** $f\simeq 0:S_q(X)\to S_q(Y)$​, whenever there exists $\{h_q:X_{q-1}\to Y_q\}$ such that
$$
\begin{matrix}
\qquad X_{q+1}&\overset {\partial_q^X}\longrightarrow& X_q\quad&\overset {\partial_{q-1}^X}\longrightarrow&\!\!\!\!X_{q-1}\\
f_{q+1}\downarrow&h_n\swarrow\,\,\,\,\,\,\,&\downarrow f_q&h_{n-1}\swarrow\,\,\,\,\,\,&\quad \downarrow f_{q-1}\\
\qquad Y_{q+1}&\underset {\partial_q^Y}\longrightarrow& Y_q\quad&\underset {\partial_{q-1}^Y}\longrightarrow&\!\!\!\! Y_{q-1}\\
\end{matrix}
$$
, where $f_q=\partial_q^Y\circ h_n+h_{n-1}\circ \partial_{q-1}^X$. 

> **Proof** Consider $H:X\times [0,1]\to Y$ which realises the homotopy $f\simeq 0$. Then 
> $$
> f: \sum c_k\sigma_k\mapsto \sum c_kf\circ \sigma_k.
> $$
> 

**Proposition** For $f\simeq g$, $f_\ast=g_\ast:H_q(X)\to H_q(Y)$. 

> 





























