---
title: 分析 12-Sept-2023
date: 2023-09-12 11:40:00
tags: 笔记
mathjax: true
---

**References** 

* Real and complex analysis by *Rudin*. 
* Functional analysis by *Lax*,
* Real analysis by *Folland*. 

> Need reference.

## $\sigma$-algebra

**Motivation** Lebesgue measure $\mathscr L^n$ (on $\mathbb R^n$) turns **volume** to **measure**. We expect that 

1. $\mathscr L^n(\bigsqcup_{i=1}^nE_i)=\sum_{i=1}^n\mathscr L^n(E_i)$ for disjoint $E_i$'s;
2. $\mathscr L^n$ is fixed under rigid motion in Euclidean space; 
3. (normalisation of unit cube) $\mathscr L^n([0,1]^n)=1$. 

**Fact** The above fact no longer holds true for $\mathcal P(\mathbb R^n)$. The counterexample is based on *the axiom of choice*. 

> Need reference. 

Due to this, we can 

* either define the *measure* on $\mathscr F\subsetneq \mathcal P(\mathbb R^n)$;
* or define the *premeasure* on $\mathcal P(\mathbb R^n)$. 

**Definition** ($\sigma$-algebra) The ($\sigma$-)algebra $\mathscr A$ on $X\neq\varnothing$ is the algebra with binary operation $\cap$ and $\cup$.

1. $\mathscr A(X)\subseteq \mathcal P(\mathbb R^n)$ is an **algebra** if it is closed under finite $\cup$ and complement;
2. $\mathscr A(X)\subseteq \mathcal P(\mathbb R^n)$ is an **$\sigma$-algebra** if it is closed under countable $\cup$ and complement.

> Due to De Morgan law, finite/countable $\cup$ and complement implies finite/countable $\cap$. 

> The existence: $\mathscr F=\mathcal P(X)$, $\mathscr F=\varnothing$. 

**Definition** (smallest $\sigma$-algebra) $\mathscr E\subseteq \mathcal P(X)$ be any subset. $\sigma(\mathscr E)$ is the intersection of $\sigma$-algebra containing $\mathscr E$, i.e., the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathscr E$. 

**Proposition** $\mathscr E_1\subseteq \sigma(\mathscr E_2)$ implies that $\sigma (\mathscr E_1)\subseteq \sigma(\mathscr E_2)$. 

**Definition** (tensor product rule) $\{X_{i}\}_{i \in I}$. Set $X=\prod_{i\in I}X_i$, $\mathscr F_i$ the $\sigma$-algebra on $X_i$. For the set of projections
$$
\pi_i: X\to X_i, (x_j)_{j\in I}\mapsto x_i \quad (i\in I),
$$
we define the tensor product of $\mathscr F_i$'s as 
$$
\mathscr F_X:=\bigotimes_{i\in I}\mathscr F_i:=\sigma\left(\left\{\pi_i^{-1}(E_i)\mid E_i\in \mathscr F_i,i\in I\right\}\right).
$$

> The universal property of $\mathscr F_X$: the smallest $\sigma$-algebra such that all $\pi_i$'s are continuous. 

> For $|I|\leq |\mathbb N|$, $\mathscr F_X$ is generated by boxes, i.e., 
> $$
> \mathscr F_X:=\bigotimes_{i\in I}\mathscr F_i:=\sigma\left(\left\{\prod_{i\in I}E_i\mid E_i\in \mathscr F_i,i\in I\right\}\right).
> $$

**Proposition** If $\{\mathscr F_i=\sigma(\mathscr E_i)\}_{i\in I}$, then $\mathscr F:=\bigotimes_{i\in I}\mathscr F_i=\sigma\left(\left\{\pi_i^{-1}(E_i)\mid E_i\in \mathscr E_i,i\in I\right\}\right)$. 

> **Proof** Set $\widehat{\mathscr E}:=\{\pi_i^{-1}(E_i)\mid E_i\in \mathscr E_i,i\in I\}$, it remains to show that $\mathscr F=\sigma(\widehat{\mathscr E})$. 
>
> * $\widehat{\mathscr E}\subseteq \mathscr F$ is clear, thus $\sigma(\widehat{\mathscr E})\subseteq \mathscr F$;
> * Define $\mathscr G_i:=\{A\subseteq X_i\mid \pi_i^{-1}(A)\in \sigma(\widehat{\mathscr E})\}$ the $\sigma$-algebra on $X_i$. Then $\mathscr E_i\subseteq \mathscr G_i$ is by definition. Hence, $\sigma(\mathscr E_i)\subseteq \mathscr G_i$. Taking $\bigotimes_{i\in I}$ on both sides, we obtain $\mathscr F\subseteq \sigma(\widehat{\mathscr E})$. 

**Definition** Given topological space $(X,\tau)$, $\mathscr B_{(X,\tau)}:=\sigma(\tau)$ is the Borel algebra. 

> In particular, write $\mathscr B_X$ for Euclidean space $X\subseteq \mathbb R^n$. 

**Proposition** $\{X_i\}_{i\in I}$ are metric spaces, $X$ is the product topological space. Then $\bigotimes_{i\in I}\mathscr B_{X_i}\subseteq \mathscr B_{X}$. Equality holds $\Longleftarrow$ $I$ is finite and $X_i$'s are separable (has countable dense subset). 

> **Proof** The inclusion $\bigotimes_{i\in I}\mathscr B_{X_i}\subseteq \mathscr B_{X}$ directly follows from the definition. When the *conditions* are satisfied, every open set in $\mathscr B$ is generated by countable union of basic open balls. The rest is clear. 
>
> For $\bigotimes_{i\in I}\mathscr B_{X_i}\neq \mathscr B_{X}$, set $X=(\mathbb R,\mathscr P(\mathbb R))$. We show that $\mathscr B_X\otimes \mathscr B_X\neq \mathscr B_{X\times X}$.
>
> * The diagonal $\Delta:=\{(x,x)\mid x\in \mathbb R\}$ is not in $\mathscr B_X\otimes \mathscr B_X$. Since the infinite $\cap$ and $\cup$ commutes with the restriction induced by $\Delta\hookrightarrow X\times X$, 
>   $$
>   \{ \Delta\cap X\mid X\in (\mathscr B_X\times \mathscr B_X)\}=\{ \{(x,x)\mid x\in F\},F\in \mathscr B_X \}.
>   $$
>
>
> * $\mathscr B_{X\times X}$ coincides $\mathcal P(\mathbb R\times\mathbb R)$, thus contains $\Delta$. 

## Measure

**Definition** The triple $(X,\mathscr F,\mu)$ is called measure space if 

1. $\mathscr F$ is $\sigma$-algebra, and $\mu:\mathscr F\to [0,\infty]$. 
2. $\mu(\varnothing)=0$, 
3. $\mu$ commutes with countable disjoint union of $\mathscr F$. 

> $E\subseteq X$ is finite if $\mu(E)<\infty$. 
>
> $E\subseteq X$ is finite if $\mu(E_i)<\infty$ and $X=\bigcup_{i\in I}E_i$ with $|I|\leq |\mathbb N|$.