---
title: 分析 14-Sept-2023
date: 2023-09-14 11:40:00
category: 
- 学科笔记
- 博一(秋)
- 流形的几何
tags: 
- 笔记
mathjax: true
---

## Basics of Topology

**Definition** (Category of topological space) $\mathsf{Ob}$ is the collection of topological spaces, and $\mathsf{Mor}$ is the collection of continuous maps. 

**Definition** (Homeomorphisms) If $f\in \mathsf{Mor}$ is continuous with continuous inverse, then we call $f$ a homeomorphism. 

> Write $X\cong Y$ whenever there exists the homeomorphism $f:X\to Y$. 

**Definition** (Homotopic morphisms) $f_0,f_1\in (X,Y)$ are homotopic whenever there exists a continuous map
$$
H:X\times I\to Y,\quad (x,t)\mapsto H(x,t),\quad H(x,i)=f_i(x)\quad (i\in \{0,1\},\forall x\in I,t\in I).
$$

> Write $f_0\simeq f_1$ whenever they are homotopic. It is clear that $\simeq$ is also an equivalency relation. 

**Example** $f_0,f_1:X\to U\,\, (\subseteq E^n)$ are always homotopic, where $U$ is convex in $n$-dimensional Euclidean space $E^n$. Here we consider $F(x,t)=tf_1(x)+(1-t)f_0(x)$. 

**Definition** (Homotopic relevant to a subset) We say $f_0,f_1:X\to Y\quad\mathrm{rel}(A)$ for some $A\subseteq X$, whenever there exists a continuous $H:X\times I\to Y$ such that
$$
H(x,i)=f_i(x)\quad H(a,t)=f_0(a)=f_1(a)\quad (i\in \{0,1\},\forall a\in A,t\in I).
$$

> In other words, $f_0\simeq f_1\quad \mathrm{rel}(A)$ is realised by some $H$ partially constant with arbitrary $a\in A$. 

**Definition** (Homotopy equivalent) $X\simeq Y$ are homotopy equivalent objects whenever they are isomorphic in the homotopy category. In other words, there exists $g:X\to Y$ and $f:Y\to X$ such that $f\circ g\simeq \mathrm{id}_Y$ and $g\circ f\simeq \mathrm{id}_X$. 

**Example** $X\times \mathbb R\simeq X$. Set $f:X\times \mathbb R\to X$, $(x,t)\mapsto x$ and $g:X\to X\times \mathbb R$, $x\mapsto (x,0)$. Then $f\circ g=\mathrm{id}_X$. Since
$$
H:(X\times \mathbb R)\times I\to (X\times \mathbb R),\quad ((x,t),t')\mapsto (x,tt')
$$
realise $g\circ f\simeq \mathrm{id}_{X\times \mathbb R}$, we have that $X\times \mathbb R\simeq X$. 

**Definition** (Contractible object) $X$ is contractible whenever $X\simeq $ a point. 

**Definition** (Null-homotopy) $f:X\to Y$ is called null-homotopy whenever $f\simeq$ constant map. 

























